Einstein’s Miraculous Year

Image Not Available

Einstein’s
Miraculous Year
✦

Five Papers That Changed
the Face of Physics

E D I T E D A N D I N T R O D U C ED B Y

John Stachel
WITH THE ASSISTANCE OF

Trevor Lipscombe, Alice Calaprice,
and Sam Elworthy
AND
WITH A FOREWORD BY

Roger Penrose

PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS

Copyright © 1998 by Princeton University Press
Published by Princeton University Press, 41 William Street,
Princeton, New Jersey 08540
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press,
Chichester, West Sussex
All Rights Reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Einstein’s miraculous year : five papers that changed the
face of physics / edited and introduced by John Stachel ;
with the assistance of Trevor Lipscombe,
Alice Calaprice, Sam Elworthy ;
with a foreword by Roger Penrose.
p.
cm.
ISBN 0-691-05938-1 (cloth : alk. paper)
1. Physics—History—20th century. 2. Einstein, Albert,
1879–1955. I. Stachel, John J., 1928–
.
QC7.E52 1998
530.1—dc21
97-48441
This book has been composed in Caledonia
Princeton University Press books are
printed on acid-free paper and meet the guidelines
for permanence and durability of the Committee
on Production Guidelines for Book Longevity
of the Council on Library Resources
http://pup.princeton.edu
Printed in the United States of America
2 4 6 8 10 9 7 5 3 1

Disclaimer:
Some images in the original version of this book are not
available for inclusion in the eBook.

CONTENTS

foreword, by Roger Penrose

vii

publisher’s preface

xv

introduction, by John Stachel

3

PART ONE

Einstein’s Dissertation on the Determination of
Molecular Dimensions
Paper 1. A New Determination of Molecular Dimensions

29
45

PART TWO

Einstein on Brownian Motion
Paper 2. On the Motion of Small Particles Suspended in
Liquids at Rest Required by the Molecular-Kinetic
Theory of Heat

71

85

PART THREE

Einstein on the Theory of Relativity
Paper 3. On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies
Paper 4. Does the Inertia of a Body Depend on Its
Energy Content?

99
123
161

PART FOUR

Einstein’s Early Work on the Quantum Hypothesis
Paper 5. On a Heuristic Point of View Concerning the
Production and Transformation of Light

165
177

This page intentionally left blank

FOREWORD

In the twentieth century, we have been greatly privileged
to witness two major revolutions in our physical picture of
the world. The first of these upturned our conceptions of
space and time, combining the two into what we now call
space-time, a space-time which is found to be subtly curved
in a way that gives rise to that long-familiar, omnipresent
but mysterious, phenomenon of gravity. The second of these
revolutions completely changed the way in which we understand the nature of matter and radiation, giving us a picture
of reality in which particles behave like waves and waves like
particles, where our normal physical descriptions become
subject to essential uncertainties, and where individual objects can manifest themselves in several places at the same
time. We have come to use the term “relativity” to encompass the first of these revolutions and “quantum theory” to
encompass the second. Both have now been observationally
confirmed to a precision unprecedented in scientific history.
I think that it is fair to say that there are only three previous revolutions in our understanding of the physical world
that can bear genuine comparison with either. For the first
of these three, we must turn back to ancient Greek times,
where the notion of Euclidean geometry was introduced and
some conception was obtained of rigid bodies and static configurations. Moreover, there was a beginning of an appreciation of the crucial role of mathematical reasoning in our
insights into Nature. For the second of the three, we must
leap to the seventeenth century, when Galileo and Newton
vii

FOREWORD

told us how the motions of ponderable bodies can be understood in terms of forces between their constituent particles
and the accelerations that these forces engender. The nineteenth century gave us the third revolution, when Faraday
and Maxwell showed us that particles were not enough, and
we must consider, also, that there are continuous fields pervading space, with a reality as great as that of the particles
themselves. These fields were combined into a single allpervasive entity, referred to as the electromagnetic field, and
the behavior of light could be beautifully explained in terms
of its self-propagating oscillations.
Turning now to our present century, it is particularly remarkable that a single physicist—Albert Einstein—had such
extraordinarily deep perceptions of the workings of Nature
that he laid foundation stones of both of these twentieth-century revolutions in the single year of 1905. Not only that,
but in this same year Einstein also provided fundamental
new insights into two other areas, with his doctoral dissertation on the determination of molecular dimensions and with
his analysis of the nature of Brownian motion. This latter
analysis alone would have earned Einstein a place in history. Indeed, his work on Brownian motion (together with
the independent and parallel work of Smoluchowski) laid
the foundations of an important piece of statistical understanding which has had enormous implications in numerous
other fields.
This volume brings together the five papers that Einstein
published in that extraordinary year. To begin with, there is
the one just referred to on molecular dimensions (paper 1),
followed by the one on Brownian motion (paper 2). Then
come two on the special theory of relativity: the first initiates the “relativity” revolution, now so familiar to physicists
viii

FOREWORD

(and also perceived by the public at large), in which the notion of absolute time is abolished (paper 3); the second is a
short note deriving Einstein’s famous “E = mc2 ” (paper 4).
Finally, the (only) paper that Einstein himself actually referred to as “revolutionary” is presented, which argues that
we must, in some sense, return to the (Newtonian) idea that
light consists of particles after all—just when we had become used to the idea that light consists solely of electromagnetic waves (paper 5). From this apparent paradox, an
important ingredient of quantum mechanics was born. Together with these five classic Einstein papers, John Stachel
has provided fascinating and highly illuminating introductions that set Einstein’s achievements in their appropriate
historical settings.
I have referred above to the twentieth century’s two extraordinary revolutions in physical understanding. But it
should be made clear that, fundamental as they were, Einstein’s papers of 1905 did not quite provide the initial shots
of those revolutions; nor did these particular papers set out
the final nature of their new regimes.
The revolution in our picture of space and time that Einstein’s two 1905 relativity papers provided concerned only
what we now call the special theory. The full formulation
of the general theory of relativity, in which gravitation is interpreted in terms of curved space-time geometry, was not
achieved until ten years later. And even for special relativity,
the wonderful insights presented by Einstein in 1905 provided a theory that was not totally original with him, this
theory having been grounded in earlier ideas (notably those
of Lorentz and Poincaré). Moreover, Einstein’s viewpoint
in 1905 still lacked one important further insight—that of
space-time—introduced by Hermann Minkowski three years
ix

FOREWORD

later. Minkowski’s notion of a four-dimensional space-time
was soon adopted by Einstein, and it became one of the
crucial steppingstones to what was later to become Einstein’s
crowning achievement: his general theory of relativity.
With regard to quantum mechanics, the initial shots of
this revolution had been Max Planck’s extraordinary papers
of 1900, in which the famous relation E = hv was introduced, asserting that energy of radiation is produced in discrete little bundles, in direct proportion to the radiation’s
frequency. But Planck’s ideas were hard to make sense of in
terms of the ordinary physics of the day, and only Einstein
seems to have realized (after some while) that these tentative
proposals had a fundamental significance. Quantum theory
itself took many years to find its appropriate formulation—
and this time the unifying ideas came not from Einstein,
but from a number of other physicists, most notably Bohr,
Heisenberg, Schrödinger, Dirac, and Feynman.
There are some remarkable aspects to Einstein’s relation
to quantum physics, which border almost on the paradoxical.
Earliest and perhaps most striking of these seeming paradoxes is the fact that Einstein’s initial revolutionary papers
on quantum phenomena (paper 5) and on relativity (paper 3)
appear to start from mutually contradictory standpoints with
regard to the status of Maxwell’s electromagnetic theory as
an explanation of light. In paper 5, Einstein explicitly rejects
the view that Maxwell’s equations suffice to explain the actions of light (as waves in the electromagnetic field) and he
puts forward a model in which light behaves, instead, like little particles. Yet, in (the later) paper 3, he develops the special theory of relativity from the starting point that Maxwell’s
theory indeed does represent fundamental truth, and the
relativity theory that Einstein constructs is specifically dex

FOREWORD

signed so that it leaves Maxwell’s equations intact. Even at
the beginning of paper 5 itself, where Einstein puts forward
a “particle” viewpoint of light in conflict with Maxwell’s theory, he comments on the latter (wave) theory of light that
it “will probably never be replaced by another theory.” This
seeming conflict is all the more striking when one considers
that Einstein’s incredible strength as a physicist came from
his direct physical insights into the workings of Nature. One
could well imagine some lesser figure “trying out” one model
and then another (as is common practice with physicists of
today), where the contradiction between the two proposed
viewpoints would cause no real concern, since neither carries any particular conviction. But with Einstein, things were
quite different. He appears to have had very clear and profound ideas as to what Nature was “really like” at levels not
readily perceivable by other physicists. Indeed, his ability to
perceive Nature’s reality was one of his particular strengths.
To me, it is virtually inconceivable that he would have put
forward two papers in the same year which depended upon
hypothetical views of Nature that he felt were in contradiction with each other. Instead, he must have felt (correctly,
as it turned out) that “deep down” there was no real contradiction between the accuracy—indeed “truth”—of Maxwell’s
wave theory and the alternative “quantum” particle view that
he put forward in paper 5.
One is reminded of Isaac Newton’s struggles with basically the same problem—some 300 years earlier—in which
he proposed a curious hybrid of a wave and particle viewpoint in order to explain conflicting aspects of the behavior
of light. In Newton’s case, it is possible to understand his
dogged adherence to a particle-type picture if one takes the
(reasonable) view that Newton wished to preserve a relativxi

FOREWORD

ity principle. But this argument holds only if the relevant
relativity principle is that of Galileo (and Newton). In Einstein’s case, such an argument will not do, for the reason
that he explicitly put forward a different relativity principle
from the Galilean one, in which Maxwell’s wave theory could
survive intact. Thus, it is necessary to look more deeply to
find the profound reasons for Einstein’s extraordinary conviction that although Maxwell’s wave picture of light was, in
some sense, “true”—having been well established in 1905—
it nevertheless needed to be altered to something different which, in certain respects, harked back Newton’s hybrid
“wave-particle” picture of three centuries earlier.
It would seem that one of the important influences that
guided Einstein was his awareness of the conflict between
the discrete nature of the particles constituting ponderable
bodies and the continuous nature of Maxwell’s fields. It is
particularly manifest in Einstein’s 1905 papers that this conflict was very much in his mind. In papers 1 and 2, he
was directly concerned with demonstrating the nature of the
molecules and other small particles which constitute a fluid,
so the “atomic” nature of matter was indeed at the forefront. In these papers, he showed himself to be a master of
the physical/statistical techniques required. In paper 5, he
put this extraordinary expertise to use by treating electromagnetic fields in the same way, thereby explaining effects
that cannot be obtained with the Maxwellian view of light
alone. Indeed, it was made clear by Einstein that the problem with the classical approach was that a picture in which
continuous fields and discrete particles coexist, each interacting with the other, does not really make physical sense.
Thus, he initiated an important step toward the present-day
quantum-theoretic viewpoint that particles must indeed take
xii

FOREWORD

on attributes of waves, and fields must take on attributes of
particles. Looked at appropriately in the quantum picture,
particles and waves actually turn out to be the same thing.
The question is often raised of another seeming paradox:
Why, when Einstein started from a vantage point so much in
the lead of his contemporaries with regard to understanding
quantum phenomena, was he nevertheless left behind by
them in the subsequent development of quantum theory?
Indeed, Einstein never even accepted the quantum theory,
as that theory finally emerged in the 1920s. Many would
hold that Einstein was hampered by his “outdated” realist standpoint, whereas Niels Bohr, in particular, was able to
move forward simply by denying the very existence of such a
thing as “physical reality” at the quantum level of molecules,
atoms, and elementary particles. Yet, it is clear that the fundamental advances that Einstein was able to achieve in 1905
depended crucially on his robust adherence to a belief in the
actual reality of physical entities at the molecular and submolecular levels. This much is particularly evident in the five
papers presented here.
Can it really be true that Einstein, in any significant sense,
was as profoundly “wrong” as the followers of Bohr might
maintain? I do not believe so. I would, myself, side strongly
with Einstein in his belief in a submicroscopic reality, and
with his conviction that present-day quantum mechanics is
fundamentally incomplete. I am also of the opinion that
there are crucial insights to be found as to the nature of
this reality that will ultimately come to light from a profound
analysis of a seeming conflict between the underlying principles of quantum theory and those of Einstein’s own general
relativity. It seems to me that only when such insights are
at hand and put appropriately to use will the fundamenxiii

FOREWORD

tal tension between the laws governing the micro-world of
quantum theory and the macro-world of general relativity be
resolved. How is this resolution to be achieved? Only time
and, I believe, a new revolution will tell—in perhaps some
other Miraculous Year!
Roger Penrose
December 1997

xiv

P U B L I S H E R’S P R E F A C E

In 1905, Einstein produced five of his most significant contributions to modern science, all of which first appeared in the
prestigious German journal Annalen der Physik in that year.
More recently, they have reappeared in the original German,
with editorial annotations and prefatory essays, in volume 2
of the Collected Papers of Albert Einstein, an ongoing series
of volumes being prepared by the Einstein Papers Project at
Boston University under the sponsorship of Princeton University Press and the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.
Einstein’s Miraculous Year draws heavily from this volume
(The Swiss Years: Writings, 1900–1909), which remains the
definitive and authoritative text of all of Einstein’s writings of
those years; we encourage scholars to consult it when seeking original texts and detailed discussions and annotations of
Einstein’s work. For the present volume, we have compiled
Einstein’s five major papers of 1905 and included, in abridged
form, the historical essays and notes that deal with his contributions to relativity theory, quantum mechanics, and statistical
mechanics and adapted them for presentation in this special
edition. We are therefore indebted to the editors of volume 2
for their scholarly contributions: John Stachel, David C.
Cassidy, A. J. Kox, Jürgen Renn, and Robert Schulmann.
The English translations that appear here are new. The
intention has been to render Einstein’s scientific writings
accurately into modern English, but to retain the engaging
and clear prose style of the originals. We are deeply grateful to Trevor Lipscombe, Alice Calaprice, Sam Elworthy, and
John Stachel for preparing them.
xv

This page intentionally left blank

Einstein’s Miraculous Year

This page intentionally left blank

INTRODUCTION

I
To anyone familiar with the history of modern science, the
phrase “miraculous year” in the title immediately calls to
mind its Latin counterpart “annus mirabilis,” long used to
describe the year 1666, during which Isaac Newton laid the
foundations for much of the physics and mathematics that
revolutionized seventeenth-century science. It seems entirely
fitting to apply the same phrase to the year 1905, during which
Albert Einstein not only brought to fruition parts of that Newtonian legacy, but laid the foundations for the break with it
that has revolutionized twentieth-century science.
But the phrase was coined without reference to Newton.
In a long poem entitled Annus Mirabilis: The Year of Wonders, 1666, John Dryden, the famed Restoration poet, celebrated the victory of the English fleet over the Dutch as well
as the city of London’s survival of the Great Fire. The term
was then used to celebrate Newton’s scientific activities during the same year—a year in which he laid the foundations
of his version of the calculus, his theory of colors, and his
theory of gravitation.1 Here is Newton’s own (much later)
summary of his accomplishments during this period:
In the beginning of the year 1665 I found the Method of
approximating series & the Rule for reducing any dignity
3

INTRODUCTION

[power] of any Binomial into such a series [i.e., the binomial theorem]. The same year in May I found the method
of Tangents . . . , & in November had the direct method
of fluxions [i.e., the differential calculus] & the next year in
January had the Theory of colours & in May following I had
entrance into [th]e inverse method of fluxions [i.e., the integral calculus]. And the same year I began to think of gravity
extending to [th]e orb of the Moon & (having found out how
to estimate the force with w[hi]ch [a] globe revolving within
a sphere presses the surface of a sphere [i.e., the centrifugal force]): from Kepler’s rule of the periodical times of the
Planets being in sesquialterate proportion of their distances
from the centers of their Orbs [i.e., Kepler’s third law], I deduced that the forces w[hi]ch keep the Planets in their Orbs
must [be] reciprocally as the squares of their distances from
the centers about w[hi]ch they revolve: & thereby compared
the force requisite to keep the Moon in her Orb with the
force of gravity at the surface of the earth, & found them
answer pretty nearly. All this was in the two plague years of
1665 & 1666. For in those days I was in the prime of my age
for invention & minded Mathematicks & Philosophy more
then [sic] at any time since.2

More recently, the term annus mirabilis has been applied
to the work of Albert Einstein during 1905 in an effort to
establish a parallel between a crucial year in the life of the
founding father of classical physics and of his twentiethcentury successor.3 What did Einstein accomplish during
his miraculous year? We are fortunate in having his own
contemporary summaries of his 1905 papers. Of the first
four he wrote to a close friend:
4

INTRODUCTION

I promise you four papers . . . , the first of which I could
send you soon, since I will soon receive the free reprints.
The paper deals with radiation and the energetic properties
of light and is very revolutionary, as you will see. . . . The
second paper is a determination of the true sizes of atoms
from the diffusion and viscosity of dilute solutions of neutral substances. The third proves that, on the assumption of
the molecular [kinetic] theory of heat, bodies of the order of
magnitude of 1/1000 mm, suspended in liquids, must already
perform an observable random movement that is produced
by thermal motion; in fact, physiologists have observed motions of suspended small, inanimate, bodies, which they call
“Brownian molecular motion.” The fourth paper is only a
rough draft at this point, and is an electrodynamics of moving bodies, which employs a modification of the theory of
space and time; the purely kinematical part of this paper will
surely interest you.4

Einstein characterized the fifth paper in these words:
One more consequence of the paper on electrodynamics
has also occurred to me. The principle of relativity, in conjunction with Maxwell’s equations, requires that mass be a
direct measure of the energy contained in a body; light carries mass with it. A noticeable decrease of mass should occur
in the case of radium. The argument is amusing and seductive; but for all I know, the Lord might be laughing over it
and leading me around by the nose.5

The parallels are clear: each man was in his mid-twenties;
each had given little previous sign of the incipient flowering
of his genius; and, during a brief time span, each struck
5

INTRODUCTION

out on new paths that would ultimately revolutionize the
science of his times. If Newton was only twenty-four in 1666
while Einstein was twenty-six in 1905, no one expects such
parallels to be perfect.
While these parallels cannot be denied, upon closer inspection we can also see differences—much more significant than the slight disparity in age—between the activities
of the two men during their anni mirabiles and in the immediate consequences of their work. The first striking difference is the one between their life situations: rejected by
the academic community after graduation from the Swiss
Polytechnical School in 1900, by 1905 Einstein was already
a married man and an active father of a one-year-old son,
obliged to fulfill the demanding responsibilities of a full-time
job at the Swiss Patent Office. Newton never married (there
is speculation that he died a virgin), and he had just taken
his bachelor’s degree but was still what we would call a graduate student in 1666. Indeed, he had been temporarily freed
of even his academic responsibilities by the closure of Cambridge University after outbreaks of the plague.
Next we may note the difference in their scientific standing. Newton had published nothing by 1666, while Einstein
already had published five respectable if not extraordinary
papers in the prestigious Annalen der Physik. Thus, if 1666
marks the year when Newton’s genius caught fire and he
embarked on independent research, 1905 marks the year
when Einstein’s already matured talents manifested themselves to the world in a burst of creativity, a series of epochmaking works, all of which were published by the Annalen
either in that year or the next. None of Newton’s activities
in 1666 found their way into print until much later: “The
first blossoms of his genius flowered in private, observed
6

INTRODUCTION

silently by his own eyes alone in the years 1664 to 1666, his
anni mirabiles.”6 The reasons for Newton’s evident lack of
a need for recognition—indeed, his pronounced reluctance
to share his ideas with others, as his major works had to be
pried from his hands by others—have long been the topic
of psychological, even psychopathological, speculation.
It took a few years—an agonizingly long time for a young
man eager for recognition (see p. 115 below)—for Einstein’s
achievements to be fully acknowledged by the physics community. But the process started almost immediately in 1905;
by 1909 Einstein had been called to a chair of theoretical
physics created for him at the University of Zurich, and he
was invited to lecture at the annual meeting of the assembled German-speaking scientific community.
Thus, if 1905 marks the beginning of the emergence
of Einstein as a leading figure in the physics community,
Newton remained in self-imposed obscurity well after 1666.
Only in 1669, when at the urging of friends he allowed the
limited circulation of a mathematical manuscript divulging
some parts of the calculus he had developed, did “Newton’s
anonymity begin to dissolve.”7
Another striking difference between the two is in their
mathematical talents. Newton manifested his mathematical
creativity from the outset. “In roughly a year [1664], without
the benefit of instruction, he mastered the entire achievement of seventeenth-century analysis and began to break
new ground. . . . The fact that he was unknown does not
alter the fact that the young man not yet twenty-four, without benefit of formal instruction, had become the leading
mathematician of Europe.”8
Newton was thus able to create the mathematics necessary to develop his ideas about mechanics and gravitation.
7

INTRODUCTION

Einstein, while an able pupil and practitioner, was never
really creative in mathematics. Writing about his student
years, Einstein said:
The fact that I neglected mathematics to a certain extent had
its cause not merely in my stronger interest in the natural sciences than in mathematics but also in the following peculiar
experience. I saw that mathematics was split up into numerous specialties, each of which could easily absorb the short
lifetime granted to us. Consequently, I saw myself in the position of Buridan’s ass, which was unable to decide upon any
particular bundle of hay. Presumably this was because my intuition was not strong enough in the field of mathematics to
differentiate clearly the fundamentally important, that which
is really basic, from the rest of the more or less dispensable
erudition. Also, my interest in the study of nature was no
doubt stronger; and it was not clear to me as a young student
that access to a more profound knowledge of the more basic
principles of physics depends on the most intricate mathematical methods. This dawned upon me only gradually after
years of independent scientific work.9

Fortunately, for his works of 1905 he needed no more mathematics than he had been taught at school. Even so, it was
left to Henri Poincaré, Hermann Minkowski, and Arnold
Sommerfeld to give the special theory of relativity its most
appropriate mathematical formulation.
When a really crucial need for new mathematics manifested itself in the course of his work on the general theory
of relativity, Einstein had to make do with the tensor calculus as developed by Gregorio Ricci-Curbastro and Tullio
Levi-Civita and presented to Einstein by his friend and colleague, Marcel Grossmann. This was based on Riemannian
8

INTRODUCTION

geometry, which lacked the concepts of parallel displacement and affine connection that would have so facilitated
Einstein’s work. But he was incapable of filling this mathematical lacuna, a task that was accomplished by Levi-Civita
and Hermann Weyl only after the completion of the general
theory.
Returning to Newton: in some respects he was right to
hesitate about publication in 1666. “When 1666 closed,
Newton was not in command of the results that have made
his reputation deathless, not in mathematics, not in mechanics, not in optics. What he had done in all three was
to lay foundations, some more extensive than others, on
which he could build with assurance, but nothing was complete at the end of 1666, and most were not even close to
complete.”10
His work on the method of fluxions (as he called the calculus), even if incomplete, was worthy of publication and
would have been of great service to contemporary mathematicians had it been available to them. His work in physics
was far less advanced. His experiments on the theory of colors were interrupted by the closing of the university, and
after his return to Cambridge in 1667 he spent a decade
pursuing his optical investigations. Nevertheless, a more outgoing man might have published a preliminary account of his
theory of colors in 1666. But in the case of gravitation, after
carefully reviewing the evidence bearing on Newton’s work
on this subject through 1666, the physicist Leon Rosenfeld concluded that “it will be clear to every scientist that
Newton at this stage had opened up for himself an exciting
prospect, but had nothing fit to be published.”11 It is also
clear that, in thinking about mechanics, he had not yet arrived at a clear concept of force—an essential prerequisite
9

INTRODUCTION

for the development of what we now call Newtonian mechanics. He had given “a new definition of force in which
a body was treated as the passive subject of external forces
impressed upon it instead of the active vehicle of forces impinging on others.” But: “More than twenty years of patient
if intermittent thought would in the end elicit his whole dynamics from this initial insight.”12
To sum up, in the case of Newton, in 1666 we have a
student, working at his leisure, a mature genius in mathematics, but whose work in physics, however genial, was still
in its formative stages. In the case of Einstein, in 1905 we
have a man raising a family and pursuing a practical career,
forced to fit physics into the interstices of an already-full life,
yet already a master of theoretical physics ready to demonstrate that mastery to the world.

II
Newton’s great legacy was his advancement of what at the
time was called the mechanical philosophy and later came to
be called the mechanical worldview. In physics, it was embodied in the so-called central force program: matter was
assumed to be made up of particles of different species, referred to as “molecules.” Two such molecules exerted various
forces on each other: gravitational, electrical, magnetic, capillary, etc. These forces—attractive or repulsive—were assumed to be central, that is, to act in the direction of the
line connecting the two particles, and to obey appropriate
laws (such as the inverse square law for the gravitational
and electrostatic forces), which depended on the distance
between them. All physical phenomena were assumed to be
10

INTRODUCTION

explicable on the basis of Newton’s three laws of motion applied to molecules acted upon by such central forces.
The central force program was shaken around the middle of the nineteenth century when it appeared that, in order to explain electromagnetic interactions between moving charged molecules, velocity- and acceleration-dependent
forces had to be assumed. But it received the coup de grâce
when Michael Faraday and James Clerk Maxwell’s concept
of the electromagnetic field began to prevail. According to
the field point of view, two charged particles do not interact
directly: each charge creates fields in the space surrounding it, and it is these fields which exert forces on the other
charge. At first, these electric and magnetic fields were conceived of as states of a mechanical medium, the electromagnetic ether; these states were assumed ultimately to be
explainable on the basis of mechanical models of that ether.
Meanwhile, Maxwell’s equations gave a complete description
of the possible states of the electric and magnetic fields at all
points of space and how they change over time. By the turn
of the century, the search for mechanical explanations of the
ether had been largely abandoned in favor of Hendrik Antoon Lorentz’s viewpoint, frankly dualistic: the electric and
magnetic fields were accepted as fundamental states of the
ether, governed by Maxwell’s equations but not in need of
further explanation. Charged particles, which Lorentz called
electrons (others continued to call them molecules or ions),
obeyed Newton’s mechanical laws of motion under the influence of forces that include the electric and magnetic forces
exerted by the ether; and in turn the charged particles created these fields by their presence in and motion through
the ether.
11

INTRODUCTION

I call Lorentz’s outlook dualistic because he accepted the
mechanical worldview as applied to his electrons but regarded the ether with its electric and magnetic fields as an
additional, independent element of reality, not mechanically
explicable. To those brought up on the doctrine of the essential unity of nature, especially popular in Germany since
the time of Alexander von Humboldt, such a dualism was
uncomfortable if not intolerable.
Indeed, it was not long before Wilhelm Wien and others
suggested another possibility: perhaps the electromagnetic
field is the really fundamental entity, and the behavior of
matter depends entirely on its electromagnetic properties.
Instead of explaining the behavior of electromagnetic fields
in terms of a mechanical model of the ether, this electromagnetic worldview hoped to explain the mechanical properties of matter in terms of electric and magnetic fields.
Even Lorentz flirted with this possibility, though he never
fully adopted it.
The mechanical worldview did not simply disappear with
the advent of Maxwell’s electrodynamics. The last third of
the nineteenth century saw a remarkable new triumph of
the mechanical program. On the basis of the application of
statistical methods to large assemblies of molecules (Avogadro’s number, about 63 × 1023 molecules per mole of any
substance, here gives the measure of largeness), Maxwell
and Ludwig Boltzmann succeeded in giving a mechanical
foundation to the laws of thermodynamics and started the
program of explaining the bulk properties of matter in terms
of kinetic-molecular theories of the gaseous, liquid, and solid
states.
12

INTRODUCTION

III
Thus, as a student Einstein had to master both the traditional mechanical viewpoint, particularly its application to
the atomistic picture of matter, as well as Maxwell’s new
field-theoretical approach to electromagnetism, particularly
in Lorentz’s version. He was also confronted with a number of new phenomena, such as black-body radiation and
the photoelectric effect, which stubbornly resisted all attempts to fit them into either the old mechanical or the
new electromagnetic worldview—or any combination of the
two. From this perspective, his five epoch-making papers
of 1905 may be divided into three categories. The first two
categories concern extensions and modifications of the two
physical theories that dominated physics at the end of the
nineteenth century: classical mechanics and Maxwell’s electrodynamics.
1. His two papers on molecular dimensions and Brownian motion, papers 1 and 2 in this volume, are efforts to extend
and perfect the classical-mechanical approach, especially its
kinetic-molecular implications.
2. His two papers on the theory of special relativity, papers 3
and 4, are efforts to extend and perfect Maxwell’s theory by
modifying the foundations of classical mechanics in order to
remove the apparent contradiction between mechanics and
electrodynamics.
In these four papers, Einstein proved himself a master of
what we today call classical physics, the inheritor and continuer of the tradition that started with Galileo Galilei and
Newton and ended with Faraday, Maxwell, and Boltzmann,
to name but a few of the most outstanding representatives
of this tradition. Revolutionary as they then appeared to his
13

INTRODUCTION

contemporaries, the new insights into the nature of space,
time, and motion necessary to develop the special theory of
relativity are now seen as the climax and culmination of that
classical tradition.
3. His work on the light quantum hypotheses, paper 5, is the
only one that he himself regarded as truly radical. In the first
letter cited on p. 5 above, he wrote that this paper “deals with
radiation and the energetic properties of light and is very
revolutionary.”13 In it, he demonstrated the limited ability
of both classical mechanics and Maxwell’s electromagnetic
theory to explain the properties of electromagnetic radiation,
and introduced the hypothesis that light has a granular structure in order to explain novel phenomena such as the photoelectric effect, which cannot be explained on the basis of
classical physics. Here and subsequently, Einstein, master of
the classical tradition, proved to be its most severe and consistent critic and a pioneer in the search to find a new unified
foundation for all of physics.

IV
The papers are presented in this volume in the order suggested by the three categories mentioned above, roughly the
order of their distance from classical physics; but the reader
should feel no compulsion to read them in that order. A good
case can be made for the chronological order, for jumping
immediately to the papers on special relativity and quantum theory—or for simply dipping into the volume as one’s
interest or fancy dictates.
In the body of this volume, the reader will find detailed
discussions of each of these five papers drawn from the
thematic introductory essays in volume 2 of The Collected
14

INTRODUCTION

Papers of Albert Einstein. Here I shall give an overview of
Einstein’s work up to and including 1905 in each of the three
categories.
1. Efforts to Extend and Perfect the
Classical-Mechanical Tradition
As recently discovered letters show, by the turn of the century Einstein was already occupied with the problems that
were to take him beyond classical physics. Yet all of his papers published before 1905 treat topics that fall within the
framework of Newtonian mechanics and its applications to
the kinetic-molecular theory of matter. In his first two papers, published in 1901 and 1902, Einstein attempted to
explain several apparently quite different phenomena occurring in liquids and solutions on the basis of a single simple
hypothesis about the nature of the central force between
molecules, and how it varies with their chemical composition. Einstein hoped that his work might help to settle
the status of a long-standing (and now discarded) conjecture about a common basis for molecular and gravitational
forces—one indication of his strong ambition from the outset to contribute to the theoretical unification of all the apparently disparate phenomena of physics. In 1901 he wrote:
“It is a wonderful feeling to realize the unity of a complex
of phenomena which, to immediate sensory perception, appear to be totally separate things.”14 Much later, looking
back over his life, he wrote: “The real goal of my research
has always been the simplification and unification of the system of theoretical physics.”15
As mentioned on p. 12, another great project of nineteenth-century physics was the attempt to show that the
15

INTRODUCTION

empirically well-verified laws of thermodynamics could be
explained theoretically on the basis of an atomistic model of
matter. Maxwell and Boltzmann were pioneers in this effort,
and Einstein saw himself as continuing and perfecting their
work.
Einstein made extensive use of thermodynamical arguments in his first two papers; indeed, thermodynamics plays
an important role in all of his early work. The second paper
raises a question about the relation between the thermodynamic and kinetic-molecular approaches to thermal phenomena that he answered in his next paper. This is the first
of three, published between 1902 and 1904, devoted to the
atomistic foundations of thermodynamics. His aim was to
formulate the minimal atomistic assumptions about a mechanical system needed to derive the basic concepts and
principles of thermodynamics. Presumably because he derived it from such general assumptions, he regarded the
second law of thermodynamics as a “necessary consequence
of the mechanical worldview.”16 He also derived an equation for the mean square energy fluctuations of a system in
thermal equilibrium. In spite of its mechanical origins, this
formula involves only thermodynamical quantities, and Einstein boldly proceeded to apply the equation to an apparently nonmechanical system: black-body radiation (his first
mention of it in print), that is, electromagnetic radiation in
thermal equilibrium with matter. Black-body radiation was
the only system for which it was clear to him that energy
fluctuations should be physically significant on an observable length scale, and his calculations proved consistent with
the known properties of that radiation. This calculation suggests that Einstein may already have had in mind an attempt to treat black-body radiation as if it were a mechanical
16

INTRODUCTION

system—the basis of his “very revolutionary” light quantum
hypothesis of 1905.
In paper 1 of this volume, his doctoral dissertation, Einstein used methods based on classical hydrodynamics and
diffusion theory to show that measurement of a fluid’s viscosity with and without the presence of a dissolved substance
can be used to obtain an estimate of Avogadro’s number
(see p. 12) and the size of the molecules of the dissolved
substance. Paper 2, the so-called Brownian-motion paper,
also extends the scope of applicability of classical mechanical concepts. Einstein noted that, if the kinetic-molecular
theory of heat is correct, the laws of thermodynamics cannot be universally valid, since fluctuations must give rise to
microscopic but visible violations of the second law when
one considers particles sufficiently large for their motion to
be observable in a microscope if suspended in a liquid. Indeed, as Einstein showed, such fluctuations explain the wellknown Brownian motion of microscopic particles suspended
in a liquid. He regarded his work as establishing the limits
of validity within which thermodynamics could be applied
with complete confidence.
2. Efforts to Extend and Perfect Maxwell’s
Electrodynamics and Modify Classical Mechanics
to Cohere with It
Well before 1905, Einstein apparently was aware of a number of experiments suggesting that the mechanical principle
of relativity—the equivalence of all inertial frames of reference for the description of any mechanical phenomena—
should be extended from mechanical to optical and electromagnetic phenomena. However, such an extension was in
17

INTRODUCTION

conflict with what he regarded as the best current electrodynamical theory, Lorentz’s electron theory, which grants a
privileged status to one inertial frame: the ether rest frame
(see p. 11).
In papers 3 and 4 in this volume, Einstein succeeded in
resolving this conflict through a critical analysis of the kinematical foundations of physics, the theory of space and time,
which underlies mechanics, electrodynamics, and indeed
(although no others were known at the time) any other
dynamical theory. After a profound critical study of the
concept of simultaneity of distant events, Einstein realized
that the principle of relativity could be made compatible with Maxwell’s equations if one abandoned Newtonian
absolute time in favor of a new absolute: the speed of
light, the same in all inertial frames. As a consequence,
the Newtonian-Galileian laws of transformation between
the space and time coordinates of different inertial frames
must be replaced by a set of transformations, now called
the Lorentz transformations.17 Since these transformations
are kinematical in nature, any acceptable physical theory
must be invariant under the group of such transformations.
Maxwell’s equations, suitably reinterpreted after eliminating the concept of the ether, meet this requirement; but
Newton’s equations of motion needed revision.
Einstein’s work on the theory of relativity provides
an example of his ability to move forward amid paradox and contradiction. He employs one theory—Maxwell’s
electrodynamics—to find the limits of validity of another—
Newtonian mechanics—even though he was already aware
of the limited validity of the former (see pp. 20–22 below).
One of the major accomplishments of Einstein’s approach,
which his contemporaries found difficult to apprehend, is
18

INTRODUCTION

that relativistic kinematics is independent of the theories
that impelled its formulation. He had not only formulated
a coherent kinematical basis for both mechanics and electrodynamics, but (leaving aside the problem of gravitation)
for any new physical concepts that might be introduced. Indeed, developments in physics over almost a century have
not shaken these kinematical foundations. To use terms that
he employed later, Einstein had created a theory of principle, rather than a constructive theory.18 At the time he
expressed the distinction in these words: “One is in no way
dealing here . . . with a ‘system’ in which the individual laws
would implicitly be contained and could be found merely by
deduction therefrom, but only with a principle that (in a way
similar to the second law of thermodynamics) permits the reduction of certain laws to others.”19 The principles of such
a theory, of which thermodynamics is his prime example,
are generalizations drawn from a large amount of empirical
data that they summarize and generalize without purporting to explain. In contrast, constructive theories, such as the
kinetic theory of gases, do purport to explain certain phenomena on the basis of hypothetical entities, such as atoms
in motion, introduced precisely to provide such explanations.
It is well known that important elements of Einstein’s
distinction between principle and constructive theories are
found in Poincaré’s writings. Two lesser-known sources that
may have influenced Einstein’s emphasis on the role of principles in physics are the writings of Julius Violle and Alfred
Kleiner, which he is also known to have read.
In spite of the merits of the theory of relativity, however,
Einstein felt that it was no substitute for a constructive theory: “A physical theory can be satisfactory only if its structures are composed of elementary foundations. The theory
19

INTRODUCTION

of relativity is just as little ultimately satisfactory as, for example, classical thermodynamics was before Boltzmann had
interpreted the entropy as probability.”20
3. Demonstrations of the Limited Validity of Both
Classical Mechanics and Maxwell’s Electromagnetic Theory,
and Attempts to Comprehend Phenomena That
Cannot Be Explained by These Theories
Einstein’s efforts to perfect classical mechanics and Maxwell’s electrodynamics, and to make both theories compatible, may still be regarded as extensions, in the broadest
sense, of the classical approach to physics. However original his contributions in these areas may have been, however
revolutionary his conclusions about space and time appeared to his contemporaries, however fruitful his work
proved to be for the exploration of new areas of physics,
he was still engaged in drawing the ultimate consequences
from conceptual structures that were well established by
the end of the nineteenth century. What is unique about his
stance during the first decade of this century is his unwavering conviction that classical mechanical concepts and those
of Maxwell’s electrodynamics—as well as any mere modification or supplementation of the two—are incapable of
explaining a growing list of newly discovered phenomena
involving the behavior and interactions of matter and radiation. Einstein constantly reminded his colleagues of the
need to introduce radically new concepts to explain the
structure of both matter and radiation. He himself introduced some of these new concepts, notably the light
quantum hypothesis, although he remained unable to integrate them into a coherent physical theory.
20

INTRODUCTION

Paper 5, Einstein’s first paper on the quantum hypothesis, is a striking example of his style, mingling critique of
old concepts with the search for new ones. It opens by
demonstrating that the equipartition theorem,21 together
with Maxwell’s equations, leads to a definite formula for the
black-body radiation spectrum, now known as the RayleighJeans distribution. This distribution, which at low frequencies matches the empirically validated Planck distribution,
cannot possibly hold at high frequencies, since it implies a
divergent total energy. (He soon gave a similar demonstration, also based on the equipartition theorem, that classical
mechanics cannot explain the thermal or optical properties
of a solid, modeled as a lattice of atomic or ionic oscillators.)
Einstein next investigated this high-frequency region,
where the classically derived distribution breaks down most
dramatically. In this region, called the Wien limit, he showed
that the entropy of monochromatic radiation with a fixed
temperature depends on its volume in exactly the same way
as does the entropy of an ordinary gas composed of statistically independent particles. In short, monochromatic
radiation in the Wien limit behaves thermodynamically as
if it were composed of statistically independent quanta of
energy. To obtain this result, Einstein had to assume each
quantum has an energy proportional to its frequency. Emboldened by this result, he took the final step, proposing
his “very revolutionary” hypothesis that matter and radiation can interact only through the exchange of such energy
quanta. He demonstrated that this hypothesis explains a
number of apparently disparate phenomena, notably the
photoelectric effect; it was this work that was cited by the
Nobel Prize committee in 1921.
21

INTRODUCTION

In 1905 Einstein did not use Planck’s full distribution law.
The following year he showed that Planck’s derivation of this
law implicitly depends on the assumption that the energy
of charged oscillators can only be an integral multiple of
the quantum of energy, and hence these oscillators can only
exchange energy with the radiation field by means of such
quanta. In 1907, Einstein argued that uncharged oscillators
should be similarly quantized, thereby explaining both the
success of the DuLong-Petit law for most solids at ordinary
temperatures and the anomalously low values of the specific
heats of certain substances. He related the temperature at
which departures from the DuLong-Petit law (see p. 175)
become significant—now called the Einstein temperature—
to the fundamental frequency of the atomic oscillators, and
hence to the optical absorption spectrum of a solid.
In spite of his conviction of its fundamental inadequacy,
Einstein continued to utilize still-reliable aspects of classical mechanics with remarkable skill to explore the structure
of electromagnetic radiation. In 1909 he applied his theory of Brownian motion to a two-sided mirror immersed in
thermal radiation. He showed that the mirror would be unable to carry out such a Brownian motion indefinitely if the
fluctuations of the radiation pressure on its surfaces were
due solely to the effects of random waves, as predicted by
Maxwell’s theory. Only the existence of an additional term,
corresponding to pressure fluctuations due to the impact
of random particles on the mirror, guarantees its continued
Brownian motion. Einstein showed that both wave and particle energy fluctuation terms are consequences of Planck’s
distribution law for black-body radiation. He regarded this
result as his strongest argument for ascribing physical reality
to light quanta.
22

INTRODUCTION

Einstein was far from considering his work on the quantum hypothesis as constituting a satisfactory theory of radiation or matter. As noted on p. 19, he emphasized that
a physical theory is satisfactory only “if its structures are
composed of elementary foundations,” adding “that we are
still far from having satisfactory elementary foundations for
electrical and mechanical processes.”22 Einstein felt that he
had not achieved a real understanding of quantum phenomena because (in contrast to his satisfactory interpretation of
Boltzmann’s constant as setting the scale of statistical fluctuations) he had been unable to interpret Planck’s constant
“in an intuitive way.”23 The quantum of electric charge also
remained “a stranger” to theory.24 He was convinced that
a satisfactory theory of matter and radiation must construct
these quanta of electricity and of radiation, not simply postulate them.
As a theory of principle (see above), the theory of relativity
provides important guidelines in the search for such a satisfactory theory. Einstein anticipated the ultimate construction
of “a complete worldview that is in accord with the principle
of relativity.”25 In the meantime, the theory offered clues to
the construction of such a worldview. One clue concerns the
structure of electromagnetic radiation. Not only is the theory compatible with an emission theory of radiation, since it
implies that the velocity of light is always the same relative
to its source; the theory also requires that radiation transfer
mass between an emitter and an absorber, reinforcing Einstein’s light quantum hypothesis that radiation manifests a
particulate structure under certain circumstances. He maintained that “the next phase in the development of theoretical physics will bring us a theory of light, which may be
regarded as a sort of fusion of the undulatory and emission
23

INTRODUCTION

theories of light.”26 Other principles that Einstein regarded
as reliable guides in the search for an understanding of quantum phenomena are conservation of energy and Boltzmann’s
principle.
Einstein anticipated that “the same theoretical modification that leads to the elementary quantum [of charge]
will also lead to the quantum structure of radiation as a
consequence.”27 In 1909 he made his first attempt to find
a field theory that would explain both the structure of matter (the electron) and of radiation (the light quantum). After
investigating relativistically invariant, non-linear generalizations of Maxwell’s equations, he wrote: “I have not succeeded . . . in finding a system of equations that I could
see was suited to the construction of the elementary quantum of electricity and the light quantum. The manifold of
possibilities does not seem to be so large, however, that one
need draw back in fright from the task.”28 This attempt may
be regarded as the forerunner of his later, almost forty-yearlong search for a unified field theory of electromagnetism,
gravitation, and matter.
In 1907, Einstein’s attempt to incorporate gravitation into
the theory of relativity led him to recognize a new formal
principle, the principle of equivalence, which he interpreted
as demonstrating the need to generalize the relativity principle (which he now began to call the special relativity principle) if gravitation is to be included in its scope. He found
that, when gravitational effects are taken into account, it
is impossible to maintain the privileged role that inertial
frames of reference and Lorentz transformations play in the
original relativity theory. He started the search for a group of
transformations wider than the Lorentz group, under which
the laws of physics remain invariant when gravitation is taken
24

INTRODUCTION

into account. This search, which lasted until the end of 1915,
culminated in what Einstein considered his greatest scientific achievement: the general theory of relativity—but that
is another story, which I cannot tell here.
Nor can I do more than allude to the many ways in which
Einstein’s work on the special theory of relativity and the
quantum theory have inspired and guided not only many of
the revolutionary transformations of our picture of the physical world during the twentieth century, but—through their
influence on technological development—have contributed
to equally revolutionary transformations in our way of life.
One cannot mention quantum optics or quantum field theory, to name only a couple of theoretical advances; nor
masers and lasers, klystrons and synchrotrons—nor atomic
and hydrogen bombs, to name only a few of the multitude
of inventions that have changed our world for good or ill,
without invoking the heritage of Einstein’s miraculous year.
editorial notes
1

The phrase anni mirabiles (years of wonders) has been applied with
more accuracy to the years 1664–1666 by Newton’s biographer Richard
Westfall in Never at Rest/A Biography of Isaac Newton (Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge University Press, 1980; paperback edition, 1983), p. 140. This
book may be consulted for generally reliable biographical information
about Newton’s life.
2
I. Bernard Cohen, Introduction to Newton’s ‘Principia’ (Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1971), p. 291.
3
See, for example, Albrecht Fölsing, Albert Einstein/A Biography, tr.
by Ewald Osers (New York: Viking, 1997), p. 121: “Never before and
never since has a single person enriched science by so much in such a
short time as Einstein did in his annus mirabilis.” This book may be consulted for generally reliable biographical information about Einstein, but
its scientific explanations should be treated with caution. For an account
of Einstein’s scientific work organized biographically, see Abraham Pais,
25

INTRODUCTION

‘Subtle is the Lord . . . ’: The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein
(Oxford: Clarendon Press; New York: Oxford University Press, 1982).
4
Einstein to Conrad Habicht, 18 or 25 May 1905, The Collected
Papers of Albert Einstein (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press,
1987–), cited hereafter as Collected Papers, vol. 5 (1993), doc. 27, p. 31.
Translation from Anna Beck, tr., The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein:
English Translation (Princeton University Press, 1987–), cited hereafter
as English Translation, vol. 5 (1995), p. 20; translation modified.
5
Einstein to Conrad Habicht, 30 June–22 September 1905, Collected
Papers, vol. 5, doc. 28, p. 33; English Translation, p. 21; translation modified. Forty years later, when the explosion of the first atomic bombs
brought the equivalence between mass and energy forcefully to the
world’s attention, Einstein might have wondered just what sort of trick
the Lord had played on him.
6
Westfall, Never at Rest, p. 140.
7
Ibid., p. 205.
8
Ibid., pp. 100, 137.
9
Albert Einstein, Autobiographical Notes, Paul Arthur Schilpp, ed.
and trans. (LaSalle, Ill.: Open Court, 1979), p. 15.
10
Westfall, Never at Rest, p. 174.
11
“Newton and the Law of Gravitation,” Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. 2 (1965):
365–386, reprinted in Robert S. Cohen and John J. Stachel, eds., Selected
Papers of Leon Rosenfeld (Dordrecht/Boston: Reidel, 1979), p. 65.
12
Citation from Westfall, Never at Rest, p. 146.
13
Einstein to Conrad Habicht, May 1905, Collected Papers, vol. 5,
doc. 27, p. 31.
14
Einstein to Marcel Grossmann, 14 April 1901, Collected Papers,
vol. 1, doc. 100, p. 290.
15
From the response to a questionnaire submitted to Einstein in 1932.
See Helen Dukas and Banesh Hoffmann, Albert Einstein: The Human Side
(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1979), p. 11 for the English
translation, p. 122 for the German text.
16
Einstein, “Kinetic Theory of Thermal Equilibrium and of the Second
Law of Thermodynamics,” in Collected Papers, vol. 2, doc. 3, p. 72 (p. 432
of the 1902 original).
17
Lorentz had introduced such a set of transformations, and Henri
Poincaré had so named them; but the kinematical interpretation that Einstein gave to them is quite different.
18
For the distinction between theories of principle and constructive
theories, see Albert Einstein, “Time, Space and Gravitation,” The Times
(London), 28 November 1919, p. 13; reprinted as “What Is the Theory of
26

INTRODUCTION

Relativity?” in Ideas and Opinions (New York: Crown, 1954), pp. 227–232.
He later reminisced about the origins of the theory: “Gradually I despaired
of the possibility of discovering the true laws by means of constructive efforts based on known facts. The longer and the more desperately I tried,
the more I came to the conviction that only the discovery of a universal
formal principle could lead us to assured results. The example I saw before me was thermodynamics” (Autobiographical Notes, p. 48; translation,
p. 49). For several years after 1905, Einstein referred to the “relativity
principle” rather than to the “theory of relativity.”
19
Einstein, “Comments on the Note of Mr. Paul Ehrenfest: ‘The
Translatory Motion of Deformable Electrons and the Area Law,’ ” in Collected Papers, vol. 2, doc. 44, p. 411 (p. 207 of the 1907 original).
20
Einstein to Arnold Sommerfeld, 14 January 1908, Collected Papers,
vol. 5, doc. 73, pp. 86–88. A decade later, Einstein elaborated this idea:
“When we say that we have succeeded in understanding a group of natural
processes, we always mean by this that a constructive theory has been
found, which embraces the processes in question” (from “Time, Space
and Gravitation”).
21
This is a result of classical statistical mechanics, according to which
each degree of freedom of a mechanical system in thermal equilibrium
receives, on the average, the same share of the total energy of the system.
22
Einstein to Arnold Sommerfeld, 14 January 1908, Collected Papers,
vol. 5, doc. 73, p. 87.
23
Ibid.
24
See Einstein, “On the Present Status of the Radiation Problem,” in
Collected Papers, vol. 2, doc. 56, p. 549 (p. 192 of the 1909 original).
25
Einstein, “On the Inertia of Energy Required by the Relativity Principle,” in Collected Papers, vol. 2, doc. 45, pp. 414–415 (p. 372 of the 1907
original).
26
Einstein, “On the Development of Our Views Concerning the Nature and Constitution of Radiation,” in Collected Papers, vol. 2, doc. 60,
pp. 564–565 (pp. 482–483 of the 1909 original).
27
Einstein, “On the Present Status of the Radiation Problem,” in Collected Papers, vol. 2, doc. 56, pp. 549–550 (pp. 192–193 of the 1909
original).
28
Ibid., p. 550 (p. 193 of the 1909 original). This attempt at a field
theory seems to represent Einstein’s first step toward a field ontology.

27

This page intentionally left blank

Part One
✦
Einstein’s Dissertation on
the Determination of
Molecular Dimensions

Image Not Available

Lecture hall in the Physics Building, Eidgenössische
Technische Hochschule, Zurich, 1905. (Courtesy of ETH)

Einstein submitted a dissertation to the University of Zurich
in 1901, about a year after graduation from the Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule (ETH), but withdrew it
early in 1902. In a successful second attempt three years
later, he combined the techniques of classical hydrodynamics with those of the theory of diffusion to create a new
method for the determination of molecular sizes and of
Avogadro’s number, a method he applied to solute sugar
molecules. The dissertation was completed on 30 April 1905
and submitted to the University of Zurich on 20 July. On
19 August 1905, shortly after the thesis was accepted, the
Annalen der Physik received a slightly different version for
publication.
By 1905, several methods for the experimental determination of molecular dimensions were available. Although
estimates of upper bounds for the sizes of microscopic constituents of matter had been discussed for a long time, the
first reliable methods for determining molecular sizes were
developed in the second half of the nineteenth century,
based on the kinetic theory of gases. The study of phenomena as diverse as contact electricity in metals, the dispersion
of light, and black-body radiation yielded new approaches to
the problem of molecular dimensions. Most of the methods
available by the turn of the century gave values for the size
of molecules and for Avogadro’s number that are in more or
less satisfactory agreement with each other.
Although Einstein claimed that the method in his dissertation is the first to use phenomena in fluids in the determination of molecular dimensions, the behavior of liquids
plays a role in various earlier methods. For example, the
31

PART ONE

comparison of densities in the liquid and gaseous states is
an important part of Loschmidt’s method, based on the kinetic theory of gases. A method that depends entirely on the
physics of liquids was developed as early as 1816 by Thomas
Young. Young’s study of surface tension in liquids led to an
estimate of the range of molecular forces, and capillary phenomena were used later in several different ways to determine molecular sizes.
A kinetic theory of liquids, comparable to the kinetic theory of gases, was not available, and the methods for deriving molecular volumes exclusively from the properties of
liquids did not give very precise results. Einstein’s method,
on the other hand, yields values comparable in precision to
those provided by the kinetic theory of gases. While methods based on capillarity presuppose the existence of molecular forces, Einstein’s central assumption is the validity of
using classical hydrodynamics to calculate the effect of solute molecules, treated as rigid spheres, on the viscosity of
the solvent in a dilute solution.
Einstein’s method is well suited to determine the size of
solute molecules that are large compared to those of the solvent. In 1905 William Sutherland published a new method
for determining the masses of large molecules that shares
important elements with Einstein’s. Both methods make use
of the molecular theory of diffusion that Nernst developed
on the basis of van’t Hoff’s analogy between solutions and
gases, and of Stokes’s law of hydrodynamical friction.
Sutherland was interested in the masses of large molecules
because of the role they play in the chemical analysis of
organic substances such as albumin. In developing a new
method for the determination of molecular dimensions, Einstein was concerned with several other problems on differ32

EINSTEIN’S DISSERTATION

ent levels of generality. An outstanding current problem of
the theory of solutions was whether molecules of the solvent
are attached to the molecules or ions of the solute. Einstein’s
dissertation contributed to the solution of this problem. He
recalled in a letter to Jean Perrin in November 1909: “At
the time I used the viscosity of the solution to determine
the volume of sugar dissolved in water because in this way I
hoped to take into account the volume of any attached water
molecules.” The results obtained in his dissertation indicate
that such an attachment does occur.
Einstein’s concerns extended beyond this particular question to more general problems of the foundations of the
theory of radiation and the existence of atoms. He later emphasized in the same letter: “A precise determination of the
size of molecules seems to me of the highest importance
because Planck’s radiation formula can be tested more precisely through such a determination than through measurements on radiation.”
The dissertation also marked the first major success in
Einstein’s effort to find further evidence for the atomic hypothesis, an effort that culminated in his explanation of
Brownian motion. By the end of 1905 he had published
three independent methods for determining molecular dimensions, and in the following years he found several more.
Of all these methods, the one in his dissertation is most
closely related to his earlier studies of physical phenomena
in liquids.
Einstein’s efforts to obtain a doctoral degree illuminate
some of the institutional constraints on the development
of his work on the problem of molecular dimensions. His
choice of a theoretical topic for a dissertation at the Univer33

PART ONE

sity of Zurich was quite unusual, both because it was theoretical and because a dissertation theme was customarily
assigned by the supervising professor. By 1900, theoretical
physics was slowly beginning to achieve recognition as an
independent discipline in German-speaking countries, but it
was not yet established at either the ETH or the University
of Zurich. A beginning had been made at the ETH soon
after its founding, with the appointment of a German mathematical physicist, Rudolf Clausius. His departure a decade
later may have been hastened by lack of official sympathy for
a too-theoretical approach to the training of engineers and
secondary-school teachers, the primary task of the school.
Clausius’s successor—after the position had been vacant
for a number of years—was H. F. Weber, who occupied the
chair for Mathematical and Technical Physics from 1875 until his death in 1912. During the last two decades of the
nineteenth century, he did original research, mainly in experimental physics and electrotechnology, including work on
a number of topics that were important for Einstein’s later
research, such as black-body radiation, the anomalous lowtemperature behavior of specific heats, and the theory of
diffusion; but his primary interests were never those of a theoretical physicist. The situation of theoretical physics at the
University of Zurich at the turn of the century was hardly
better. Four other major Swiss universities either had two
full professorships in physics or one full and one nontenured
position, while Zurich had only one physics chair, held by the
experimentalist Alfred Kleiner.
Since the ETH was not authorized to grant doctoral degrees until 1909, a special arrangement enabled ETH students to obtain doctorates from the University of Zurich.
Most dissertations in physics by ETH students were pre34

EINSTEIN’S DISSERTATION

pared under Weber’s supervision, with Kleiner as the second referee. As noted above, almost all physics dissertations
prepared at the ETH and the University of Zurich between
1901 and 1905 were on experimental topics suggested to the
students by their supervisor or at least closely related to the
latter’s research interests. The range of topics was quite limited, and generally not at the forefront of experimental research. Thermal and electrical conductivity, and instruments
for their measurement, were by far the most prominent subjects. General questions of theoretical physics, such as the
properties of the ether or the kinetic theory of gases, occasionally found their way into examination papers, but they
were hardly touched upon in dissertations.
In the winter semester of 1900–1901, Einstein intended to
work for a degree under Weber. The topic may have been
related to thermoelectricity, a field in which Einstein had
shown an interest and in which several of Weber’s doctoral
students did experimental research. After a falling-out with
Weber, Einstein turned to Kleiner for advice and comments
on his work.
Although Kleiner’s research at this time focused on measuring instruments, he did have an interest in foundational
questions of physics, and Einstein’s discussions with him covered a wide range of topics. Einstein showed his first dissertation to Kleiner before submitting it to the university in
November 1901. This dissertation has not survived, and the
evidence concerning its contents is somewhat ambiguous. In
April 1901 Einstein wrote that he planned to summarize his
work on molecular forces, up to that time mainly on liquids;
at the end of the year, his future wife Mileva Marić stated
that he had submitted a work on molecular forces in gases.
Einstein himself wrote that it concerned “a topic in the
35

PART ONE

kinetic theory of gases.” There are indications that the dissertation may have discussed Boltzmann’s work on gas theory,
as well as Drude’s work on the electron theory of metals.
By February 1902 Einstein had withdrawn the dissertation, possibly at Kleiner’s suggestion that he avoid a controversy with Boltzmann. In view of the predominantly experimental character of the physics dissertations submitted to
the University of Zurich at the time, lack of experimental
confirmation for his theoretical results may have played a
role in the decision to withdraw the thesis. In January 1903
Einstein still expressed interest in molecular forces, but he
stated in a letter to Michele Besso that he was giving up his
plan to obtain a doctorate, arguing that it would be of little help to him, and that “the whole comedy has become
tiresome for me.”
Little is known about when Einstein started to work on
the dissertation he completed in 1905. By March 1903 some
of the central ideas of the 1905 dissertation had already occurred to him. Kleiner, one of the two faculty reviewers of
his dissertation, acknowledged in his review that Einstein
had chosen the topic himself and pointed out that “the arguments and calculations to be carried out are among the most
difficult in hydrodynamics.” The other reviewer, Heinrich
Burkhardt, Professor of Mathematics at the University of
Zurich, added: “The mode of treatment demonstrates fundamental mastery of the relevant mathematical methods.”
Although Burkhardt checked Einstein’s calculations, he
overlooked a significant error in them. The only reported
criticism of Einstein’s dissertation was for being too short.
Einstein’s biographer Carl Seelig reports: “Einstein later
laughingly recounted that his dissertation was at first returned to him by Kleiner with the comment that it was too
36

EINSTEIN’S DISSERTATION

short. After he had added a single sentence, it was accepted
without further comment.”
Compared to the other topics of his research at the time,
his hydrodynamical method for determining molecular dimensions was a dissertation topic uniquely suited to the empirically oriented Zurich academic environment. In contrast
to the Brownian-motion work, for which the experimental
techniques needed to extract information from observations
were not yet available, Einstein’s hydrodynamical method
for determining the dimensions of solute molecules enabled
him to derive new empirical results from data in standard
tables.
Like Loschmidt’s method based on the kinetic theory of
gases, Einstein’s method depends on two equations for two
unknowns, Avogadro’s number N and the molecular radius
P . The first of Einstein’s equations (see third equation on
p. 64) follows from a relation between the coefficients of
viscosity of a liquid with and without suspended molecules
(k∗ and k, respectively),
k∗ = k1 + ϕ

(1)

where ϕ is the fraction of the volume occupied by the solute
molecules. This equation, in turn, is derived from a study of
the dissipation of energy in the fluid.
Einstein’s other fundamental equation follows from an expression for the coefficient of diffusion D of the solute. This
expression is obtained from Stokes’s law for a sphere of radius P moving in a liquid, and van’t Hoff’s law for the osmotic pressure:
D = RT · 1 
6πk NP
37

(2)

PART ONE

where R is the gas constant, T the absolute temperature,
and N Avogadro’s number.
The derivation of eq. (1), technically the most complicated part of Einstein’s thesis, presupposes that the motion
of the fluid can be described by the hydrodynamical equations for stationary flow of an incompressible homogeneous
liquid, even in the presence of solute molecules; that the
inertia of these molecules can be neglected; that they do
not affect each other’s motions; and that they can be treated
as rigid spheres moving in the fluid without slipping, under
the sole influence of hydrodynamical stresses. The hydrodynamic techniques needed are derived from Kirchhoff’s Vorlesungen über mathematische Physik, volume 1, Mechanik
(1897), a book that Einstein first read during his student
years.
Eq. (2) follows from the conditions for the dynamical and
thermodynamical equilibrium of the fluid. Its derivation requires the identification of the force on a single molecule,
which appears in Stokes’s law, with the apparent force due
to the osmotic pressure. The key to handling this problem is
the introduction of fictitious countervailing forces. Einstein
had earlier introduced such fictitious forces to counteract
thermodynamical effects in proving the applicability to diffusion phenomena of a generalized form of the second law
of thermodynamics, and in his papers on statistical physics.
Einstein’s derivation of eq. (2) does not involve the theoretical tools he developed in his work on the statistical foundations of thermodynamics; he reserved a more elaborate
derivation, using these methods, for his first paper on Brownian motion. Eq. (2) was derived independently, in somewhat more general form, by Sutherland in 1905. To deal
with the available empirical data, Sutherland had to allow
38

EINSTEIN’S DISSERTATION

for a varying coefficient of sliding friction between the diffusing molecule and the solution.
The basic elements of Einstein’s method—the use of diffusion theory and the application of hydrodynamical techniques to phenomena involving the atomistic constitution of
matter or electricity—can be traced back to his earlier work.
Einstein’s previous work had touched upon most aspects of
the physics of liquids in which their molecular structure is
assumed to play a role, such as Laplace’s theory of capillarity, Van der Waals’s theory of liquids, and Nernst’s theory of
diffusion and electrolytic conduction.
Before Einstein’s dissertation, the application of hydrodynamics to phenomena involving the atomic constitution of
matter or electricity was restricted to consideration of the
effects of hydrodynamical friction on the motion of ions.
Stokes’s law was employed in methods for the determination of the elementary charge and played a role in studies
of electrolytic conduction. Einstein’s interest in the theory
of electrolytic conduction may have been decisive for the
development of some of the main ideas in his dissertation.
This interest may have suggested a study of molecular aggregates in combination with water, as well as some of the
techniques used in the dissertation.
In 1903 Einstein and Besso discussed a theory of dissociation that required the assumption of such aggregates, the
“hypothesis of ionic hydrates,” as Besso called it, claiming
that this assumption resolves difficulties with Ostwald’s law
of dilution. The assumption also opens the way to a simple
calculation of the sizes of ions in solution, based on hydrodynamical considerations. In 1902 Sutherland had considered
a calculation of the sizes of ions on the basis of Stokes’s formula, but rejected it as in disagreement with experimental
39

PART ONE

data. Sutherland did not use the assumption of ionic hydrates, which can avoid such disagreement by permitting
ionic sizes to vary with such physical conditions as temperature and concentration. The idea of determining the sizes of
ions by means of classical hydrodynamics occurred to Einstein in March 1903, when he proposed in a letter to Besso
what appears to be just the calculation that Sutherland had
rejected:
Have you already calculated the absolute magnitude of ions
on the assumption that they are spheres and so large that
the hydrodynamical equations for viscous fluids are applicable? With our knowledge of the absolute magnitude of the
electron [charge] this would be a simple matter indeed. I
would have done it myself but lack the reference material
and the time; you could also bring in diffusion in order to
obtain information about neutral salt molecules in solution.

This passage is remarkable, because both key elements of
Einstein’s method for the determination of molecular dimensions, the theories of hydrodynamics and diffusion, are
already mentioned, although the reference to hydrodynamics probably covers only Stokes’s law. While a program very
similar to the first of Einstein’s proposals to Besso was being
pursued at the time by William Robert Bousfield, Einstein’s
dissertation can be seen to be an elaboration of the second proposal, regarding diffusion and neutral salt molecules.
Einstein may thus have been proceeding similarly to Nernst,
who first developed his theory of diffusion for the simpler
case of nonelectrolytes. The study of sugar solutions could
draw upon extensive and relatively precise numerical data
on viscosity and the diffusion coefficient, avoiding problems
of dissociation and electrical interactions.
40

EINSTEIN’S DISSERTATION

The results obtained with Einstein’s method for the determination of molecular dimensions differed from those obtained by other methods at the time, even when new data
taken from Landolt and Bornstein’s physical-chemical tables
were used to recalculate them. In his papers on Brownian motion, Einstein cited either the value he obtained for
Avogadro’s number, or a more standard one. Only once, in
1908, did he comment on the uncertainty in the determination of this number. By 1909 Perrin’s careful measurements
of Brownian motion produced a new value for Avogadro’s
number, significantly different from the values Einstein obtained from his hydrodynamical method and from Planck’s
black-body radiation law. For Einstein, this discrepancy was
particularly significant in view of what he regarded as the
problematic nature of Planck’s derivation of the radiation
law.
In 1909 Einstein drew Perrin’s attention to his hydrodynamical method for determining the size of solute molecules. He emphasized that this method allows one to take
into account the volume of any water molecules attached
to the solute molecules, and suggested its application to
the suspensions studied by Perrin. In the following year, an
experimental study of Einstein’s formula for the viscosity
coefficients (eq. [1] above) was performed in Perrin’s laboratory by Jacques Bancelin. Bancelin studied uniform aqueous
emulsions of gamboge, prepared with the help of Perrin’s
method of fractional centrifugation. Bancelin confirmed that
the increase in viscosity does not depend on the size of the
suspended particles, but only on the fraction of the total
volume that they occupy. However, he found a value for the
increased viscosity that differs significantly from Einstein’s
prediction. Bancelin sent a report of his experiments to
41

PART ONE

Einstein, apparently citing a value of 3.9 for the coefficient
of ϕ in eq. (1), instead of the predicted value of l.
After an unsuccessful attempt to find an error in his calculations, Einstein wrote to his student and collaborator Ludwig Hopf in January 1911: “I have checked my previous calculations and arguments and found no error in them. You
would be doing a great service in this matter if you would
carefully recheck my investigation. Either there is an error
in the work, or the volume of Perrin’s suspended substance
in the suspended state is greater than Perrin believes.”
Hopf found an error in the derivatives of the velocity
components, which occur in the equations for the pressure
components in Einstein’s dissertation (see pp. 53–54 below).
After correction of this error, the coefficient of ϕ in eq. (1)
becomes 2.5.
By mid-January 1911 Einstein had informed Bancelin and
Perrin of Hopf’s discovery of the error in his calculations.
The remaining discrepancy between the corrected factor 2.5
in eq. (1) and Bancelin’s experimental value of 3.9 led Einstein to suspect that there might also be an experimental
error. He asked Perrin: “Wouldn’t it be possible that your
mastic particles, like colloids, are in a swollen state? The influence of such a swelling 39/25 would be of rather slight
influence on Brownian motion, so that it might possibly have
escaped you.”
On 21 January 1911, Einstein submitted his correction
for publication. In the Annalen der Physik he presented the
corrected form of some of the equations in the dissertation
and recalculated Avogadro’s number. He obtained a value
of 656 × 1023 per mole, a value that is close to those derived from kinetic theory and Planck’s black-body radiation
formula.
42

EINSTEIN’S DISSERTATION

Bancelin continued his experiments, with results that
brought experiment and theory into closer agreement. Four
months later, he presented a paper on his viscosity measurements to the French Academy of Sciences, giving a value
of 2.9 as the coefficient of ϕ in eq. (1). Bancelin also recalculated Avogadro’s number by extrapolating his results for
emulsions to sugar solutions, and found a value of 70 × 1023
per mole.
Einstein’s dissertation was at first overshadowed by his
more spectacular work on Brownian motion, and it required
an initiative by Einstein to bring it to the attention of his
fellow scientists. But the wide variety of applications of its
results ultimately made the dissertation one of his most frequently cited papers.

43

This page intentionally left blank

PA P E R 1
✦

A New Determination of
Molecular Dimensions

(Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Zurich)
The earliest determinations of the real sizes of molecules
were made possible by the kinetic theory of gases, but thus
far the physical phenomena observed in liquids have not
helped in ascertaining molecular sizes. No doubt this is because it has not yet been possible to surmount the hurdles
that impede the development of a detailed molecular-kinetic
theory of liquids. It will be shown in this paper that the size
of molecules of substances dissolved in an undissociated dilute solution can be determined from the internal viscosity
of the solution and of the pure solvent, and from the diffusion rate of the solute within the solvent provided that the
volume of a solute molecule is large compared to the volume of a solvent molecule. This is possible because, with
respect to its mobility within the solvent and its effect on
the viscosity of the latter, such a molecule will behave approximately like a solid body suspended in a solvent. Thus,
in the immediate vicinity of a molecule, one can apply the
equations of hydrodynamics to the motion of the solvent in
45

PAPER 1

which the liquid is treated as homogeneous and hence its
molecular structure need not be taken into consideration.
We will choose a sphere as the solid body that shall represent the solute molecules.

1. How a Very Small Sphere Suspended in a
Liquid Influences Its Motion
Let us base our discussion on an incompressible homogeneous liquid with a coefficient of viscosity k, whose velocity
components u, v, w are given as functions of the coordinates x, y, z and of time. At an arbitrary point x0 , y0 , z0 ,
let us think of the functions u, v, w as functions of x − x0 ,
y − y0 , z − z0 expanded in a Taylor’s series, and of a region G
around this point so small that within it only the linear terms
of this expansion need be considered. As is well known, the
motion of the liquid within G can then be regarded as a
superposition of three motions:
1. A parallel displacement of all particles of the liquid without
a change in their relative positions;
2. A rotation of the liquid without a change in the relative
positions of the particles of the liquid;
3. A dilational motion in three mutually perpendicular directions (the principal axes of dilation).

Let us now assume that in region G there is a spherical
rigid body whose center lies at the point x0 , y0 , z0 and whose
dimensions are very small compared with those of region G.
We further assume that the motion is so slow that the kinetic
energy of the sphere as well as that of the liquid can be neglected. We also assume that the velocity components of a
46

DETERMINATION OF MOLECULAR DIMENSIONS

surface element of the sphere coincide with the corresponding velocity components of the adjacent liquid particles, i.e.,
that the contact layer (imagined to be continuous) also displays a coefficient of viscosity that is not infinitesimally small.
It is obvious that the sphere simply takes part in the partial
motions 1 and 2 without altering the motion of neighboring
particles, since the liquid moves like a rigid body in these
partial motions and since we have neglected the effects of
inertia.
However, motion 3 does get altered by the presence of
the sphere, and our next task will be to investigate the effect of the sphere on this motion of the liquid. If we refer
motion 3 to a coordinate system whose axes are parallel to
the principal axes of dilation and set
x − x0 = ξ
y − y0 = η
z − z0 = ζ

we can describe the above motion, if the sphere is not
present, by the equations


 u0 = Aξ
v0 = Bη

 w = Cζ
0

(1)

A, B, C are constants that, because the liquid is incompressible, satisfy the condition
A + B + C = 0

(2)

If, now, a rigid sphere of radius P is introduced at the point
x0 , y0 , z0 , the motion of the liquid around it will change.
We will, for convenience, call P “finite,” but all the values of
47

PAPER 1

ξ, η, ζ, for which the liquid motion is no longer noticeably
altered by the sphere, we will call “infinitely large.”
Because of the symmetry of the motion of the liquid being
considered, it is clear that during this motion the sphere can
perform neither a translation nor a rotation, and we obtain
the boundary conditions
u = v = w = 0 when ρ = P 

where
ρ=



ξ2 + η2 + ζ 2 > 0

Here u, v, w denote the velocity components of this motion
(changed by the sphere). If we set
u = Aξ + u1 
v = Bη + v1 
w = Cζ + w1 

(3)

the velocities u1 , v1 , w1 would have to vanish at infinity, since
at infinity the motion represented in equations (3) should
reduce to that represented by equations (1).
The functions u, v, w have to satisfy the equations of hydrodynamics, including viscosity and neglecting inertia. Thus
the following equations will hold:1

δp
δp
δp


= ku
= kv
= w1

δξ
δη
δζ

δu + δv + δw = 0


δξ
δη
δζ

(4)

1
G. Kirchhoff, Vorlesungen über Mechanik, 26. Vorl. (Lectures on Mechanics, Lecture 26).

48

DETERMINATION OF MOLECULAR DIMENSIONS

where  denotes the operator
δ2 + δ2 + δ2
δξ2
δη2
δζ 2

and p the hydrostatic pressure.
Since equations (1) are solutions of equations (4) and the
latter are linear, according to (3) the quantities u1 , v1 , w1
must also satisfy equations (4). I determined u1 , v1 , w1 , and
p by a method given in section 4 of the Kirchhoff lectures
mentioned above2 and found


 
 
 

δ2 ρ1
δ2 ρ1
δ2 δ1

3
5

p = − 3 kP A
+B
+C



δξ2
δη2
δζ 2






ξ


u = Aξ − 5 P 3 A 3 − δD 
3
ρ
δξ


η


v = Bη − 5 P 3 B 3 − δD 


3
ρ
δη





ζ


w = Cζ − 5 P 3 C 3 − δD 

3
ρ
δζ

+ const.,

2

(5)5

“From equations (4) it follows that p = 0. If we take p in accordance
with this condition and determine a function V that satisfies the equation
V = 1 p
k
then equations (4) are satisfied if one sets
u = δV + u′ 
δξ

v = δV + v′ 
δη

w = δV + w′ 
δζ

and chooses u′ , v′ , w′ such that u′ = 0, v′ = 0, w′ = 0, and
δu′ + δv′ + δw′ = − 1 p”
δξ
δη
δζ
k
Now, if one sets
p
δ2 ρ1
= 2c 3 2
k
δξ
49

PAPER 1

where



δ2 ρ1
δ2 ρ


D = A 65 p3 2 + 61 P 5



δξ
δξ 2







δ2 ρ1
δ2 ρ
+ B 65 p3 2 + 61 P 5

δη2
δη








δ2 ρ1
δ2 ρ


+ C 65 p3 2 + 61 P 5


δζ
δζ 2

(5a)



It can easily be proved that equations (5) are solutions of
equations (4). Since
 1 = 0
ρ

ξ = 0

ρ = 2
ρ

and
ξ
 3
ρ



1
δ

= 0
=−
δξ
ρ

we get
ku = −k δ D
δξ 
δ2 ρ1
δ2 ρ1
= −k δ 53 P 3 A 2 + 35 P 3 B 2 + · · · 
δξ
δη
δξ
and, in accordance with this,
V =c



2
2 3
δ2 ρ1
δ2 ρ
a ξ2 − η − ζ
+
+
b
δξ 2
2
2
δξ 3
2

and
u′ = −2c

δ δ1

δξ

v′ = 0

w′ = 04

then the constants a, b, c can be determined such that u = v = w = 0
for ρ = P . By superposing three such solutions, we get the solution given
in equations (5) and (5a).
50

DETERMINATION OF MOLECULAR DIMENSIONS

However, according to the first of equations (5), the last of
6
In the same
the expressions we obtained is identical to δn
δξ .
way, it can be shown that the second and third of equations
(4) are satisfied. Further, we get
δu + δv + δw = A + B + C
δξ
δη
δξ

δ2 ρ1
δ2 ρ1
δ2 ρ1
5 3
+
B
+
C
+ 3P A
δξ2
δη2
δζ 2

− D

But since according to equation (5a)
D = 35 AP 3



A

δ2 ρ1
δξ2

+B

δ2 ρ1
δη2

+C

δ2 ρ1
δζ 2



it follows that the last of equations (4) is satisfied as well. As
far as the boundary conditions are concerned, at infinitely
large ρ our equations for u, v, w reduce to equations (1). By
inserting the value of D from equation (5a) into the second
of equations (5), we get
3

u = Aξ − 52 P 6 ξAξ2 + Bη2 + Cζ 2 7
ρ
5
5
+ 25 P 7 ξAξ2 + Bη2 + Cζ 2  − P 5 Aξ

ρ

(6)

ρ

We see that u vanishes for ρ = P . For reasons of symmetry,
the same holds for v and w. We have now demonstrated that
equations (5) satisfy equations (4) as well as the boundary
conditions of the problem.
It can also be demonstrated that equations (5) are the
only solution of equations (4) that is compatible with the
boundary conditions of our problem. The proof will only be
outlined here. Assume that in a finite region the velocity
components u, v, w of a liquid satisfy equations (4). If there
existed yet another solution U , V , W for equations (4) in
51

PAPER 1

which U = u, V = v, W = w at the boundaries of the region
in question, then U − u, V − v, W − w would be a solution
for equations (4) in which the velocity components vanish at
the boundary. Thus no mechanical work is supplied to the
liquid in the region in question. Since we have neglected the
kinetic energy of the liquid, it follows that in this volume
the work converted to heat is also zero. This leads to the
conclusion that in the entire space we must have u = u1 ,
v = v1 , w = w1 if the region is at least partly bounded by
stationary walls.8 By passing to the limit, this result can also
be extended to a case where the region is infinite, as in the
case considered above. One can thus show that the solution
found above is the only solution to the problem.
We now draw a sphere of radius R around point x0 , y0 ,
z0 , with R infinitely large compared to P , and calculate the
energy (per unit time) that is converted to heat in the liquid
inside the sphere. This energy W is equal to the mechanical
work done on the liquid. If Xn , Yn , Zn denote the components of the pressure exerted on the surface of the sphere
of radius R, we have
W =



Xn u + Yn v + Zn w ds

where the integral is to be extended over the surface of the
sphere of radius R. We have here
Xn = − Xξ

η
ξ
ζ 9
+ Xη + Xζ

ρ
ρ
ρ

Yn = − Yξ

η
ξ
ζ
+ Yη + Yζ

ρ
ρ
ρ

Zn = − Zξ

η
ξ
ζ
+ Zη + Zζ

ρ
ρ
ρ
52

DETERMINATION OF MOLECULAR DIMENSIONS

where
Xξ = p − 2k δu 
δξ

Yζ = Zη = −k δv + δw 
δζ
δη

Yη = p − 2k δv 
δη

Zξ = Xζ = −k δw + δu 
δξ
δζ

Zζ = p − 2k δw 
δζ

Xη = Yξ = −k δu + δv 
δη δξ

The expressions for u, v, w become simpler if we take into
account that for ρ = R the terms with the factor P 5 /ρ5 vanish in comparison to those with the factor P 3 /ρ3 . We have
to set

ξAξ2 + Bη2 + Cζ 2 



u = Aξ − 25 P 3



ρ5




ηAξ2 + Bη2 + Cζ 2 

v = Bη − 25 P 3

ρ5





ζAξ 2 + Bη2 + Cζ 2 



 w = Cζ − 25 P 3
ρ5

(6a)10

For p we obtain from the first of equations (5), by similar
neglect of terms,
p = −5kP 3

Aξ2 + Bη2 + Cζ 2
+ const11
ρ5

Now we obtain
Xξ = −2kA + 10kP 3

2
2
2
2
Aξ2
3 ξ Aξ + Bη + Cζ 
−
25kP
ρ5
ρ7
13

Xη = +10kP 3

2
2
2
2
Aξη
3 η Aξ + Bη + Cζ 
−
25kP
ρ5
ρ7

Xζ = +10kP 3

ζ 2 Aξ2 + Bη2 + Cζ 2 
Aξζ
+ 25kP 3

5
ρ
ρ7
53

12

PAPER 1

and from this,
Xn = 2Ak

ξAξ2 + Bη2 + Cζ 2  14
ξ
ξ
− 10AkP 3 4 + 25kP 3

ρ
ρ
ρ6

With the help of the expressions for Yn and Zn derived by
cyclic permutation, and ignoring all terms that contain the
ratio P /ρ in higher than the third power, we get15
Xn u + Yn v + Zn w + 2k A2 ξ 2 + B2 η2 + C2 ζ 2 
ρ
3
3
−10k P 4 A2 ξ 2 +  +  + 20k P 6 Aξ2 +  + 2 
ρ
ρ

If we integrate over the sphere and take into account that




ds = 4R2 π



ξ 2 ds = η2 ds = ζ 2 ds = 43 πR4 



ξ4 ds = η4 ds = ζ 4 ds = 45 πR6 



4
η2 ζ 2 ds = ζ 2 ξ 2 ds = ξ2 η2 ds = 15
πR6 16

4
πR6 A2 + B2 + C2 17
Aξ2 + Bη2 + Cζ 2 2 ds = 15

we get18
W = 83 πR3 kδ2 − 83 πP 3 kδ2 = 2δ2 kV − 

where we set
δ = A2 + B2 + C2 19
4
3
3 πR = V

and
3
4
3 πP = 

54

(7)

DETERMINATION OF MOLECULAR DIMENSIONS

If the suspended sphere were not present  = 0, we would
obtain
W0 = 2δ2 kV

(7a)

for the energy dissipated in volume V . Thus, the presence
of the sphere decreases the energy dissipated by 2δ2 k. It
is noteworthy that the effect of the suspended sphere on the
quantity of energy dissipated is exactly the same as it would
be if the presence of the sphere did not affect the motion
of the liquid around it at all.20

2. Calculation of the Coefficient of Viscosity
of a Liquid in Which Very Many
Irregularly Distributed Small Spheres
Are Suspended
In the previous section we considered the case where, in
a region G of the order of magnitude defined earlier, a
sphere is suspended that is very small compared with the
region, and we investigated how this sphere affects the motion of the liquid. We are now going to assume that region
G contains innumerably many randomly distributed spheres
of equal radius, and that this radius is so small that the combined volume of all of the spheres is very small compared
to the region G. Let the number of spheres per unit volume be n, where, up to negligibly small terms, n is constant
throughout the liquid.
Again, we begin with the motion of a homogeneous liquid
without any suspended spheres and consider again the most
general dilational motion. If no spheres are present, an appropriate choice of the coordinate system will permit us to
55

PAPER 1

represent the velocity components u0 , v0 , w0 at an arbitrary
point x, y, z of G by the equations
u0 = Ax
v0 = By
w0 = Cz

where
A + B + C = 0

A sphere suspended at point xν , yν , zν will affect this motion in a way that is evident from equation (6).21 Since
we are choosing the average distance between neighboring
spheres to be large compared to their radius, and consequently the additional velocity components arising from all
the suspended spheres are very small compared to u0 , v0 ,
w0 , we obtain for the velocity components u, v, w in the
liquid, after taking into account the suspended spheres and
neglecting terms of higher orders,



2
2
2
3



5 P ξν Aξν + Bην + Cζν 






2 ρ2


3


ρ
ν
ν


u
=
Ax
−




5 ξ Aξ 2 + Bη2 + Cζ 2 
5 Aξ 



ν
P
P
ν
ν
ν
ν
5




+ 4
 −2 4



ρν
ρν3
ρν ρν








5 P 3 ην Aξν2 + Bην2 + Cζν2 









2 ρν2
ρν3

v = By −
2
2
2


5



P 5 Bην
5 P ην Aξν + Bην + Cζν 



+
−



2 4


ρν
ρν3
ρν4 ρν





2
2
2

3




5 P ζv Aξv + Bην + Cζν 








2
2
3


ρ
ρ

ν
ν



w
=
Cz
−

2
2
2


5 Cζ 
5



P
ν
5 P ζν Aξν + Bην + Cζν 



+ 4

 −2 4
ρν
ρν3
ρν ρν
56

(8)

DETERMINATION OF MOLECULAR DIMENSIONS

where the sum is to be extended over all spheres in the
region G and where we have set
ξν = x − xν 
ην = y − yν 
ζν = z − zν 

ρν =



ξν2 + ην2 + ζν2 

xν , yν , zν are the coordinates of the centers of the spheres.
Furthermore, from equations (7) and (7a) we conclude that,
up to infinitesimally small quantities of higher order, the
presence of each sphere results in a decrease of heat production by 2δ2 k per unit time22 and that the energy converted to heat in region G has the value
W = 2δ2 k − 2nδ2 k

per unit volume, or
W = 2δ2 k1 − ϕ

(7b)

where ϕ denotes the fraction of the volume that is occupied
by the spheres.
Equation (7b) gives the impression that the coefficient of
viscosity of the inhomogeneous mixture of liquid and suspended spheres (in the following called “mixture” for short)
is smaller than the coefficient of viscosity k of the liquid.23
However, this is not so, since A, B, C are not the values
of the principal dilations of the liquid flow represented by
equations (8); we will call the principal dilations of the mixture A∗ , B∗ , C∗ . For reasons of symmetry, it follows that the
directions of the principal dilations of the mixture are parallel to the directions of the principal dilations A, B, C, i.e.,
57

PAPER 1

to the coordinate axes. If we write equations (8) in the form

u = Ax +
u
 ν
v = By +
v
 ν
z = Cz +
wν 

we get
A∗ =

δu
δx

=A+
x=0

 δuv
δx

=A−
x=0

 δuv
δxv


x=0

If we exclude the immediate surroundings of the individual
spheres, we can omit the second and third terms in the
expressions for u, v, w and thus obtain for x = y = z = 0:

3 x Ax2 + By 2 + Cz2 

ν
ν
ν


uν = − 52 P 2 ν


3

r
r

ν
ν



3 y Ax2 + By 2 + Cz2 
ν
ν
ν
vν = − 25 P 2 ν


rν
rν3




2
2
2


P 3 xAxν + Byν + Czν  

 wν = − 25 2
rν
rν3

(9)24

where we have set

rν =



x1ν + yν2 + z2ν > 0

We extend the summation over the volume of a sphere K
of very large radius R whose center lies at the coordinate
origin. Further, if we consider the irregularly distributed
spheres as being uniformly distributed and replace the sum
with an integral, we obtain25
 δu
ν
dxν dyν dzν 
K δxν
 ux
ν ν
ds
= A−n
rν

A∗ = A − n

58

DETERMINATION OF MOLECULAR DIMENSIONS

where the last integral extends over the surface of the sphere
K. Taking into account (9), we find that
3 
A∗ = A − 52 P 6 n x20 Ax20 + By02 + Cz20  ds
R
= A − n 34 P 3 π A = A1 − ϕ

Analogously,
B∗ = B1 − ϕ
C∗ = C1 − ϕ

If we set
δ∗2 = A∗2 + B∗2 + C∗2 26

then, neglecting infinitesimally small terms of higher order,
δ∗2 = δ2 1 − 2ϕ

For the heat developed per unit time and volume, we
found27
W ∗ = 2δ2 k1 − ϕ

If k∗ denotes the coefficient of viscosity of the mixture, we
have
W ∗ = 2δ∗2 k∗ 

The last three equations yield, neglecting infinitesimal quantities of higher order,
k∗ = k1 + ϕ28

Thus we obtain the following result:
If very small rigid spheres are suspended in a liquid, the
coefficient of viscosity increases by a fraction that is equal to
the total volume of the spheres suspended in a unit volume,
provided that this total volume is very small.29
59

PAPER 1

3. On the Volume of a Dissolved Substance
Whose Molecular Volume Is Large
Compared to That of the Solvent
Consider a dilute solution of a substance that does not dissociate in the solution. Let a molecule of the dissolved substance be large compared to a molecule of the solvent and
be considered as a rigid sphere of radius P . We can then
apply the result obtained in section 2. If k∗ denotes the coefficient of viscosity of the solution and k that of the pure
solvent, we have
k∗ = 1 + ϕ
k

where ϕ is the total volume of the molecules per unit volume
of the solution.30
We wish to calculate ϕ for a 1% aqueous solution of
sugar. According to Burkhard’s observations (Landolt and
Börnstein’s Tables), k∗ /k = 10245 (at 20◦ C) for a 1% aqueous sugar solution, hence ϕ = 00245 for (almost exactly)
0.01 g of sugar. Thus, one gram of sugar dissolved in water
has the same effect on the coefficient of viscosity as do small
suspended rigid spheres of a total volume of 2.45 cm3 .31
This consideration neglects the effect exerted on the viscosity of the solvent by the osmotic pressure resulting from the
dissolved sugar.
Let us remember that 1 g of solid sugar has a volume
of 0.61 cm3 . This same volume is also found for the specific volume s of sugar in solution if one considers the sugar
solution as a mixture of water and sugar in dissolved form.
I.e., the density of a 1% aqueous sugar solution (relative to
water of the same temperature) at 175◦ is 1.00388. Hence
we have (neglecting the difference between the density of
60

DETERMINATION OF MOLECULAR DIMENSIONS

water at 4◦ and at 175◦ 
1
= 099 + 001 s
100388

and thus
s = 061

Thus, while the sugar solution behaves like a mixture of
water and solid sugar with respect to its density, the effect on
viscosity is four times larger than what would result from the
suspension of the same amount of sugar.32 It seems to me
that, from the point of view of molecular theory, this result
can only be interpreted by assuming that a sugar molecule in
solution impedes the mobility of the water in its immediate
vicinity, so that an amount of water whose volume is about
three times larger than the volume of the sugar molecule is
attached to the sugar molecule.33
Hence we may say that a dissolved molecule of sugar
(i.e, the molecule together with the water attached to it)
behaves hydrodynamically like a sphere with a volume of
245 · 342/N cm3 , where 342 is the molecular weight of
sugar and N is the number of actual molecules in one grammolecule.34

4. On the Diffusion of an Undissociated
Substance in a Liquid Solution
Let us consider a solution of the kind discussed in section 3.
If a force K acts upon a molecule, which we assume to be a
sphere with radius P , the molecule will move with a velocity
ω, which is determined by P and the coefficient of viscosity
61

PAPER 1

k of the solvent. Indeed, the following equation holds:3
ω=

K 
6πkP

(1)

We use this relation to calculate the coefficient of diffusion of an undissociated solution. If p is the osmotic pressure of the dissolved substance, the only motion-producing
force in such a dilute solution, then the force acting on the
dissolved substance per unit volume of solution in the direction of the X-axis equals −δp/δx. If there are ρ grams
per unit volume, and m is the molecular weight of the dissolved substance and N the number of actual molecules
in one gram-molecule, then ρ/m · N is the number of
(actual) molecules per unit volume, and the force exerted
on a molecule by virtue of the concentration gradient is
δp

K=− m
ρN δx

(2)

If the solution is sufficiently dilute, the osmotic pressure is
given by the equation:
p = R ρT 
m

(3)

where T is the absolute temperature and R = 831 · 107 .
From equations (1), (2), and (3) we obtain for the migration
velocity of the dissolved substance
δρ

ω = − RT 1 1
6πk NP ρ δx

(4)

3
G. Kirchhoff, Vorlesungen über Mechanik, 26. Vorl. (Lectures on Mechanics, Lecture 26), equation (22).

62

DETERMINATION OF MOLECULAR DIMENSIONS

Finally, the amount of the substance passing per unit time
through a unit cross section in the direction of the X-axis is
δρ

ωρ = − RT · 1
6πk NP δx

Hence, we obtain for the coefficient of diffusion D
D = RT · 1 35
6nk NP

Thus, from the coefficients of diffusion and viscosity of the
solvent we can calculate the product of the number N of actual molecules in one gram-molecule and the hydrodynamically effective molecular radius P .
In this derivation the osmotic pressure has been treated as
a force acting on the individual molecules, which obviously
does not agree with the viewpoint of the kinetic molecular
theory; since in our case—according to the latter—the osmotic pressure must be conceived as only an apparent force.
However, this difficulty disappears when one considers that
the (apparent) osmotic forces that correspond to the concentration gradients in the solution may be kept in (dynamic)
equilibrium by means of numerically equal forces acting on
the individual molecules in the opposite direction, which can
easily be seen by thermodynamic methods.
δp
The osmotic force acting on a unit mass − ρ1 δx can be
counterbalanced by the force −Px (exerted on the individual
dissolved molecules) if
δp
− Px = 0
−1
ρ δx

Thus, if one imagines that (per unit mass) the dissolved
substance is acted upon by two sets of forces Px and −Px
that mutually cancel out each other, then −Px counterbalances the osmotic pressure, leaving only the force Px , which
63

PAPER 1

is numerically equal to the osmotic pressure, as the cause
of motion. The difficulty mentioned above has thus been
eliminated.4
5. Determination of Molecular
Dimensions with the Help of the
Obtained Relations
We found in section 3 that
k∗ = 1 + ϕ = 1 + n · 4 πP 3 36
3
k

where n is the number of dissolved molecules per unit volume and P is the hydrodynamically effective radius of the
molecule. If we take into account that
n = ρ
N
m

where ρ denotes the mass of the dissolved substance per
unit volume and m its molecular weight, we get
∗
NP 3 = 3 m k − 1 37
4π ρ k

On the other hand, we found in section 4 that
NP = RT 1 
6πk D

These two equations enable us to calculate separately the
quantities P and N , of which N must be independent of
the nature of the solvent, the dissolved substance, and the
temperature, if our theory agrees with the facts.
4
A detailed presentation of this line of reasoning can be found in Ann.
d. Phys. 17 (1905): 549. [See also this volume, paper 2, p. 86.]

64

DETERMINATION OF MOLECULAR DIMENSIONS

We will carry out the calculation for an aqueous solution
of sugar. From the data on the viscosity of the sugar solution
cited earlier, it follows that at 20◦ C,
NP 3 = 20038

According to the experiments of Graham (as calculated by
Stefan), the diffusion coefficient of sugar in water is 0.384 at
95◦ C, if the day is chosen as the unit of time. The viscosity
of water at 95◦ is 0.0135. We will insert these data in our
formula for the diffusion coefficient, even though they have
been obtained using 10% solutions, and strict validity of our
formula cannot be expected at such high concentrations. We
obtain
NP = 208 · 1016 

Neglecting the differences between the values of P at 95◦
and 20◦ , the values found for NP 3 and NP yield
P = 99 · 10−8 cm
N = 21 · 1023 

The value found for N shows satisfactory agreement, in
order of magnitude, with values found for this quantity by
other methods.39
(Bern, 30 April 1905)

editorial notes
1
A factor k is missing on the right-hand side of the last equation in this
line; this error is corrected in Albert Einstein, “Eine neue Bestimmung
der Moleküldimensionen,” Ann. d. Phys. 19 (1906), pp. 289–305, cited
hereafter as Einstein 1906. Note that δδ denotes partial differentiation
modern ∂∂ .

65

PAPER 1

The denominator on the right-hand side should be δξ 2 ; this error is
corrected in ibid.
3
The denominator of the first term on the right-hand side should be
2
δξ ; this error is corrected in ibid. A reprint of this article in the Einstein
Archive shows marginalia and interlineations in Einstein’s hand, the first
of which refer to this and the following equation. The term “+g ρ1 ” was
added to the right-hand side of the equations for V and then canceled.
These marginalia and interlineations are presumably part of Einstein’s
unsuccessful attempt to find a calculational error; see note 13 below.
2

δ

1

The equation for u′ should be, as corrected in ibid., u′ = −2c δξρ .
In the reprint mentioned in note 3, the first derivative with respect to
ξ was changed to a second derivative and then changed back to a first
derivative. At the bottom of the page, the following equations are written:
4

b = −1/12 P 5 a
c = −5/12 P 3 a
g = 2/3 P 3 a
5
The numerator of the last term in the curly parentheses should be
“δ2 1/ρ,” as corrected in ibid.
δp
6 δn
δξ should be δξ , as corrected in Einstein, Untersuchungen über die
Theorie der ‘Brownschen Bewegung’ (ed. Reinhold Fürth. Ostwald’s Klassiker der exakten Wissenschaften, no. 199. Leipzig: Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft, 1922); cited hereafter as Einstein 1922.
7
The factor preceding the first parenthesis should be, as corrected in
Einstein 1906,
3

−5/2 P 5 
ρ
8

The equations should be u = U , v = V , w = W .
Xξ, Xη, Xζ should be Xξ , etc., as corrected in Einstein 1906.
10
In Einstein’s reprint (see note 3), the term + 65 P 3 Aξ
is added to the
ρ3
right-hand side of the first equation. After the last terms of the second
and third equations, series of dots are added. These interlineations are
presumably related to the marginal calculations indicated in note 3.
11
In Einstein’s reprint (see note 3), the term +5 k P 3 ρ13 is added to the
right-hand side of this equation. This interlineation is presumably related
to the marginal calculations referred to in note 3.
9

66

DETERMINATION OF MOLECULAR DIMENSIONS

In Einstein’s reprint (see note 3), the term − 53 k P 3 A ρ13 − 9 ρξ5 is
added to the right-hand side of this equation. This addition is presumably
related to the marginal calculations referred to in note 3.
13
This equation and the subsequent one are incorrect. Apart from
minor errors, they contain a calculational error bearing on the numerical
factors. In Einstein 1906, +25 in front of the last term in the equation for
Xζ is changed to −25. In Einstein’s reprint (see note 3), the factor ζ 2 in
the last term on the right-hand side of this equation is corrected to ξζ, and
the factor η2 in front of the parenthesis in the last term on the right-hand
side of the equation for Xη is corrected to ξη. The calculational error that
is also contained in these equations, and some of its consequences, are
corrected in “Berichtigung zu meiner Arbeit: ‘Eine Neue Bestimmung
der Moleküldimensionen,’ ” Collected Papers, vol. 3, doc. 14, pp. 416–
417. The corrections are integrated into the text of the reprint of this
paper in Einstein 1922. The correct equations are:
12

A + Bξη
ρ5
2
ξηAξ
+ Bη2 + Cζ 2 
−25kP 3
ρ7
A
+
Cξζ
Xζ = +5kP 3
ρ5
2
2
2
3 ξζAξ + Bη + Cζ 
−25kP

7
ρ

Xη = +5kP 3

14

−10 should be replaced by −5 and 25 by 20 (see previous note).
The third + sign should be replaced by = as corrected in Einstein
1922. −10 should be replaced by −5, and 20 by 15 (see note 13).
16
In Einstein’s reprint (see note 3), the factor 4/15 was changed to
8/15 and then changed back to 4/15.
17
4/15 should be replaced by 8/15 as corrected in Einstein’s reprint
(see note 3).
18
This equation should be (see note 13):
15

W = 8/3πR3 kδ2 + 4/3πP 3 kδ2
= 2δ2 kV + /2
δ should be δ2 . This correction is made in Einstein’s reprint (see
note 3).
20
It follows from the correction to eq. (7) that the dissipated energy
is actually increased by half this amount. The statement in the text is only
partially corrected in Einstein 1922; the amount is correctly given but still
19

67

PAPER 1

described as a diminution. The final sentence of this paragraph, which no
longer applies to the corrected calculation, is omitted from Einstein 1922.
21
The point should be denoted by xν , yν , zν , as corrected in Einstein 1906.
22
The heat production per unit time is actually increased by δ2 k.
The correct equations are thus (see note 13): W = 2δ2 k + nδ2 k, and
W = 2δ2 k1 + φ/2.
23
The following two sentences are revised in Einstein 1922: “In order
to calculate from equation (7b) the coefficient of friction of an inhomogeneous mixture of fluid and suspended spheres (in the following called
‘mixture’ for short) that we are examining, we must further take into consideration that A, B, C are not values of the principal dilations of the
motion of fluid represented in equation (8); we want to designate the
principal dilations of the mixture as A∗ , B∗ , C∗ .”
24
In this and the following two equations, the sign after = should be
+; the third equation should have zν instead of x in the numerator; the
latter correction is made in Einstein 1906.
25
The factor in front of the second term in the first equation is 5/2
(see ibid.). In deriving the second equation, Einstein used the equations
in the middle of p. 54 and the fact that A + B + C = 0.
26
In Einstein’s reprint (see note 3), = A2 + B2 + δ2 1 − 2ϕ is added
to the right-hand side of this equation and then crossed out.
27
The correct equation is (see note 13): W ∗ = 2δ2 k1 + ϕ/2.
28
The correct equation is (see note 13): k∗ = k1 + 25ϕ.
29
The fraction is actually 2.5 times the total volume of the suspended
spheres (see note 13).
30
The correct equation is (see note 13): k∗ /k = 1 + 25ϕ.
31
The correct value is 0.98 cm3 (see note 13). The following sentence
is omitted in Einstein 1906.
32
The viscosity is actually one and one-half times greater (see note 13).
33
The quantity of water bound to a sugar molecule has a volume that
is actually one-half that of the sugar molecule (see note 13). The existence
of molecular aggregates in combination with water was debated at that
time.
34
The volume of the sphere is actually 098 · 342/N cm3 (see note 13).
35
The first denominator should be 6πk, as corrected in Einstein 1906.
This equation was obtained independently by William Sutherland in 1905
by a similar argument. The idea to use this formula for a determination
of molecular dimensions may have occurred to Einstein as early as 1903.
68

DETERMINATION OF MOLECULAR DIMENSIONS
36

The correct equation is (see note 13): k∗ /k = 1 + 25ϕ = 1 +
25n 4/3 πP 3 .
37
The correct equation has an additional factor 2/5 on the right-hand
side (see note 13).
38
For the experimental data, see p. 60. The correct value is 80 (see
note 13).
39
The values obtained by using the correct equations (see Einstein
1922) are P = 62 10−8 cm; and N = 33 1023 (per mole).

69

This page intentionally left blank

Part Two
✦
Einstein on Brownian Motion

Image Not Available

Einstein as a student at the ETH, or shortly thereafter.
(Courtesy of Hebrew University of Jerusalem)

Einstein’s study of Brownian motion constitutes one of the
high points in the long tradition of research on the kinetic
theory of heat and of his own contributions to this field.
Some of the consequences of his work were of great significance for the development of physics in the twentieth century. Einstein’s derivation of the laws governing Brownian
motion, and their subsequent experimental verification by
Perrin and others, contributed significantly to the acknowledgment of the physical reality of atoms by the then stillnumerous skeptics. His papers on Brownian motion helped
to establish the study of fluctuation phenomena as a new
branch of physics. The methods he created in the course of
his research prepared the way for statistical thermodynamics, later developed by Szilard and others, and for a general
theory of stochastic processes.
Since at least the middle of the nineteenth century, a
growing number of physicists and chemists had accepted
the atomic hypothesis. The assumption that matter consists
of atoms and molecules suggested a number of relations between phenomena, both physical and chemical, that are unexpected from a purely macroscopic point of view. Various
methods for the determination of molecular dimensions gave
values that were often in surprisingly good agreement. The
physical reality of atoms was not, however, universally accepted by the end of the century. There were still some fervent opponents of the atomic hypothesis, such as Wilhelm
Ostwald and Georg Helm, who called themselves “energeticists” to indicate that they regarded the concept of energy as
the most fundamental ontological concept of science. Others, such as Ernst Mach, while adopting a hostile position
73

PART TWO

with regard to the existence of entities not directly accessible to sense experience—in particular, atoms—admitted that
atomism may have a heuristic or didactic utility. It was not
uncommon, even among scientists who made explicit use of
atomic assumptions in their work, to regard atomism as a
mere working hypothesis.
Although at the turn of the century the atomic hypothesis
was proving its heuristic value in such new areas of research
as the electron theory of metals and stereochemistry, some
physicists had come to regard the theory of heat as an area
in which the atomic hypothesis was no longer fruitful. Einstein probably became aware of the controversy over the
molecular theory of heat during his student years, when he
read works by Mach, Ostwald, and Boltzmann. In 1900 Einstein finished reading Boltzmann’s Gastheorie (1896, 1898),
in which Boltzmann, presumably reacting to a dispute with
Ostwald and Helm, suggested that he was isolated in his support of the kinetic theory. Although he criticized Boltzmann
for a lack of emphasis on the comparison of his theory with
observation, Einstein was firmly convinced of the principles
of Boltzmann’s theory.
In his first published attempts at independent research,
Einstein took for granted the atomistic constitution of matter and of electricity. He developed a theory of molecular
forces, on the basis of which he established a number of
relations among observable phenomena. Einstein’s interest
soon shifted from the details of molecular forces to the quest
for facts, “which would guarantee as much as possible the
existence of atoms of definite finite size,” as he later characterized this phase of his work.1
The irregular movement of microscopic particles suspended in a liquid had been noted long before the botanist
74

EINSTEIN ON BROWNIAN MOTION

Robert Brown published his careful observations in 1828,
but Brown was the first to emphasize its ubiquity and to
exclude its explanation as a vital phenomenon. Advances in
observational technique and in theory served to eliminate
a number of unsatisfactory explanations of Brownian motion
by the end of the nineteenth century, if not to verify the correct one. Explanations of Brownian motion proposed after
the exclusion of vital forces involved capillarity, convection
currents, evaporation, interaction with light, and electrical
forces. During the 1870s, the kinetic theory of heat was proposed as an explanation by several authors. A powerful argument against this explanation was developed by the cytologist Karl von Nägeli in 1879. He first used the equipartition
theorem to calculate the average velocity of the molecules
of the liquid, and then used the laws of elastic collision to
obtain the velocity of a suspended particle. He concluded
that the velocity of such a particle, because of its comparatively large mass, would be vanishingly small. William Ramsay and Louis-Georges Gouy independently tried to defend
the molecular explanation of Brownian motion by assuming the existence of collective motions of large numbers of
atoms in liquids, an assumption suited to the refutation of
arguments such as Nägeli’s.
In 1900 an entirely different way of applying the kinetic
theory of heat to Brownian motion was investigated by Felix Exner, who assumed an equipartition of energy between
the molecules of the liquid and the suspended particles. He
calculated the velocity of the molecules on the basis of observations that he interpreted as giving the mean velocities
of the suspended particles, obtaining results that were not
in agreement with contemporary estimates of molecular velocities. In Exner’s work there is no fundamental difference
75

PART TWO

between a solute molecule and a suspended particle. Einstein
arrived at a similar conclusion, but instead of emphasizing the
equipartition theorem, he took the osmotic pressure and its
relation to the theory of diffusion and to the molecular theory
of heat as the starting point of his analysis of Brownian motion. He writes in the paper that follows: “According to this
theory, a dissolved molecule differs from a suspended body
in size, only and it is difficult to see why suspended bodies
should not produce the same osmotic pressure as an equal
number of dissolved molecules” (see pp. 86–87).
On the other hand, Einstein pointed out, according to the
“classical theory of thermodynamics,” suspended particles—
as macroscopic objects—should not exert an osmotic pressure on a semipermeable wall. Before Einstein, no one
seems to have recognized that this contrast provides a
touchstone for the kinetic theory. His choice of a suspension to study the relations between the thermodynamic
and atomic theories of heat amounted to a radical reversal
of perspective. Usually the legitimacy of microscopic explanations of thermodynamic results was at issue. In this
case, however, the question centered on the applicability of
a thermodynamic concept—osmotic pressure—to the suspended particles.
In the course of studying colloidal solutions, the commonly made distinction between suspensions and solutions
in nineteenth-century chemistry had lost its absolute character. The absence of any fundamental difference between
solutions and suspensions was made strikingly clear in 1902,
when observations performed with the newly invented ultramicroscope made it possible to resolve many colloidal
solutions into their constituents. The ultramicroscope not
only demonstrated the physical reality of colloidal particles,
76

EINSTEIN ON BROWNIAN MOTION

but showed that irregular motion is one of their outstanding
characteristics.
Although the ultramicroscope brought closer what Jean
Perrin called the “distant reality” of molecules, one of their
fundamental properties, their velocities, remained inaccessible to measurement. The inconsistencies that result
from presumed velocity measurements, such as Exner’s, had
hinted at this problem; but it was explicitly discussed for
the first time in the theoretical studies of Brownian motion
that Einstein and Smoluchowski independently published
between 1905 and 1907. Both introduced the mean-square
displacement of the suspended particles as the primary observable quantity in Brownian motion. Einstein argued that
dissipative forces change the direction and magnitude of the
velocity of a suspended particle on such a short timescale
that it cannot be measured. This argument demonstrates
the fundamental role of dissipation in Einstein’s analysis of
Brownian motion.
In summary, the study of previous explanations of Brownian motion shows that three elements of Einstein’s approach
are characteristic of his decisive progress: (1) he based his
analysis on the osmotic pressure rather than on the equipartition theorem; (2) he identified the mean-square displacements of suspended particles rather than their velocities
as suitable observable quantities; and (3) he simultaneously
applied the molecular theory of heat and the macroscopic
theory of dissipation to the same phenomenon, rather than
restricting each of these conceptual tools to a single scale,
molecular or macroscopic.
In the paper on Brownian motion (paper 2), Einstein
proved “that, on the assumption of the molecular theory
77

PART TWO

of heat, bodies of the order of magnitude of 1/1000 mm
suspended in liquids must already carry out an observable
random movement, which is generated by thermal motion,”
as he wrote in a letter to Conrad Habicht in the late spring
of 1905. Einstein wrote this paper “without knowing that
observations concerning Brownian motion were already long
familiar.”2 He did not mention Brownian motion in the title, although he conjectured that the motion he predicted
might be identical to Brownian motion. Boltzmann’s Gastheorie, which Einstein carefully studied during his student
years, explicitly denies that the thermal motion of molecules
in a gas leads to observable motions of suspended bodies.
(This denial may be an instance of what Einstein referred to
as Boltzmann’s attaching too little importance to a comparison of theory with observation.) Sometime between 1902
and 1905, Einstein read Poincaré’s Science et hypothèse,
which contains a brief discussion of Gouy’s work on Brownian motion, emphasizing Gouy’s argument that Brownian
motion violates the second law of thermodynamics. Einstein’s second paper on Brownian motion,3 written after
Siedentopf drew his attention to Gouy’s work, cites Gouy’s
observations as qualitative confirmation of his results.
Paper 2 opens with the derivation of an expression for the
diffusion coefficient in terms of the radius of the suspended
particles and the temperature and viscosity of the liquid, an
expression already obtained in Einstein’s doctoral dissertation. Unlike the previous derivation, however, the new one
makes use of the methods of statistical physics that Einstein
developed. The new approach is different in two respects:
1. In his dissertation, which deals with solutions rather than
suspensions, Einstein simply assumed the validity of van’t
78

EINSTEIN ON BROWNIAN MOTION

Hoff’s law for the osmotic pressure. He now gave a derivation of this law from an expression for the free energy of the
suspension that follows from statistical mechanics.
2. Rather than simply considering the equilibrium of forces acting on a single molecule, Einstein derived the equilibrium
between the osmotic pressure and a friction force obeying
Stokes’s law by a thermodynamical argument.

The ensuing derivation of the diffusion equation is based
on the introduction of a probability distribution for displacements. The introduction of such a distribution is presumably
related to Einstein’s previous use of probability distributions.
Einstein assumed the existence of a time interval, short with
respect to the observation time, yet sufficiently long that the
motions of a suspended particle in two successive time intervals can be treated as independent of each other. The displacement of the suspended particles can then be described
by a probability distribution that determines the number of
particles displaced by a certain distance in each time interval. Einstein derived the diffusion equation from an analysis of the time-dependence of the particle distribution, calculated from the probability distribution for displacements.
This derivation is based on his crucial insight into the role
of Brownian motion as the microscopic process responsible for diffusion on a macroscopic scale. Compared to such
a derivation, one based on an analogy to the treatment of
diffusion in the kinetic theory of gases may have appeared
more problematic to Einstein because of the lack of a fully
developed kinetic theory of liquids.
The solution of the resulting diffusion equation, combined
with his expression for the diffusion coefficient, yields an expression for the mean-square displacement, λx , as a function
79

PART TWO

of time, an expression that Einstein suggested could be used
experimentally to determine Avogadro’s number N :
√
λx = t



1 
RT
N 3πkP

(1)

where t is the time, R the gas constant, T the temperature,
k the viscosity, and P the radius of the suspended particles.
Through his earlier work, Einstein was familiar with the
theory of diffusion in both gases and liquids, as well as with
other techniques needed for his analysis of Brownian motion. In 1902 he suggested the replacement of semipermeable
walls in thermodynamic arguments by external conservative
forces, a method he stated to be particularly useful for treating arbitrary mixtures. During 1903 Einstein discussed the
notions of semipermeable membrane and osmotic pressure
in his correspondence with Michele Besso, showing interest
in Sutherland’s hypothesis on the mechanism of semipermeable membranes. In his papers on statistical physics, Einstein generalized the idea of external conservative forces and
noted the significant role of fluctuations in statistical physics.
In 1904 he derived an expression for mean square deviations
from the average value of the energy of a system.
Several newly perfected techniques for the experimental
investigation of Brownian motion, notably the ultramicroscope and new methods for preparing colloidal solutions,
were available by the time Einstein published his first articles on the subject. As one of the first applications of the ultramicroscope, Siedentopf and Zsigmondy observed Brownian motion in colloidal solutions but did not perform precise
measurements. Les ultramicroscopes et les objets ultramicroscopiques, a book on the ultramicroscope and its applications by Aimé Cotton and Henri Mouton, published in 1906,
80

EINSTEIN ON BROWNIAN MOTION

helped stimulate interest in Brownian motion and brought
Einstein’s theory to the attention of researchers in the field.
Using an ultramicroscope and a sophisticated observational
technique, The Svedberg carried out careful measurements
of Brownian motion with the aim of testing the interpretation of Brownian motion that maintains it is caused by the
thermal motions of molecules. Svedberg reported on his attempts to test Einstein’s theory in 1906 and corresponded
with Einstein on the subject of Brownian motion, sending
him one of his papers.
Svedberg followed Zsigmondy in assuming two types of
motions for colloidal particles, a translational motion and a
“proper [Brownian] motion.” Svedberg restricted his attention to the latter and attempted to facilitate its measurement
by superimposing a translational motion. He described the
resulting trajectories as “sinusoid-like,” but cautioned against
concluding that the motion had an oscillatory character.4 In
the analysis of his results, however, Svedberg introduced a
terminology that was adapted to the description of a simple
oscillatory motion, relating the observed amplitudes to Einstein’s root-mean-square displacement. Earlier, he had tried
to estimate molecular velocities on the basis of the observed
velocities of colloidal particles. In another article, written
mainly to correct the basic misunderstandings in Svedberg’s
work, Einstein showed that the velocities of ultramicroscopic
particles, as calculated from the equipartition theorem, cannot be directly observed.5 On 11 November 1909, Einstein
wrote to Perrin: “The errors in Svedberg’s method of observation and also in his theoretical treatment became clear to
me at once. I wrote a minor correction at the time, which
only addressed the worst ones, as I couldn’t bring myself to
detract from Mr. S.’s great pleasure in his work.”
81

PART TWO

In addition to the misconceptions underlying Svedberg’s
experimental work, his numerical results slightly disagreed
with Einstein’s predictions. Other early experimental work
on Einstein’s and Smoluchowski’s theories, such as Felix
Ehrenhaft’s observations of displacements of aerosol particles, Victor Henri’s cinematographical measurements of
displacements of suspended particles, or Max Seddig’s study
of the temperature dependence of Brownian motion, provided qualitative confirmation of the theory; but the work of
Henri and Seddig also failed to yield quantitative agreement.
As a consequence, the kinetic interpretation of Brownian
motion was not universally accepted in 1908 as the exclusive
explanation of the phenomenon.
Einstein noted that the control of the temperature was
the principal difficulty in obtaining satisfactory results from
the photographic records of Seddig and Henri. Before Jean
Perrin published his thorough experimental investigation of
the phenomenon, Einstein was skeptical about the possibility of obtaining precise measurements of Brownian motion.
On 30 July 1908, in a letter to Jakob Laub, Einstein commented rather enthusiastically on Seddig’s work in spite of
its shortcomings: “I have read Seddig’s paper. He has done
it very well. I cannot quite make head or tail of his descriptions of the results.” Einstein wrote to Jean Perrin on 11
November the following year: “I would have considered it
impossible to investigate Brownian motion so precisely; it is
a stroke of luck for this subject that you have taken it up.”
In a series of experiments, the first results of which were
published in 1908, Perrin achieved an until then unmatched
precision in the confirmation of almost all of Einstein’s predictions. Like Einstein, Perrin recognized that the analogy
established by van’t Hoff between an ideal gas and a solution
82

EINSTEIN ON BROWNIAN MOTION

could be extended to colloidal solutions and suspensions, and
that this analogy provides a unique means of obtaining evidence for atomism. In his first experiments on Brownian
motion, Perrin tested a formula for the vertical distribution
of suspended particles under the influence of gravitation.
Although Perrin probably was aware of Einstein’s theory
through Langevin, he was apparently unaware that Einstein
had derived a similar formula. Challenged by criticism, Perrin
checked his assumption of the validity of Stokes’s formula for
the particles used in his experiments. In two further papers
published in 1908, Perrin applied his methods to a determination of Avogadro’s number.
In the same year, Perrin’s doctoral student Chaudesaigues
subjected Einstein’s displacement formula to experimental
tests. Contrary to Henri’s results mentioned above, the results are in excellent agreement with theoretical predictions.
Perrin continued these successful experiments with the help
of other students; to Einstein’s surprise, he was able to include rotational Brownian motion in his investigations. On
11 November 1909, Einstein wrote to Perrin: “I would not
have considered a measurement of the rotations as feasible. In my eyes it was only a pretty trifle.” Perrin’s success
was based on the ingenious combination of several experimental techniques for preparing emulsions with precisely
controllable particle sizes, and for measuring the particles’
number and displacements. He summarized his results in
various review articles and books that significantly furthered
the general acceptance of atomism.
Beginning in 1907, Einstein himself tried to contribute to
the experimental study of fluctuation phenomena. His prediction of voltage fluctuations in condensers stimulated him
to explore the possibility of measuring small quantities of
83

PART TWO

electricity in order to provide experimental support for “a
phenomenon in the field of electricity related to Brownian
motion.”6 On 15 July 1907, he wrote to his friends Conrad
and Paul Habicht about his discovery of a method for the
measurement of small quantities of electrical energy. Soon
afterward the Habichts tried to build the device proposed
by Einstein. At the end of 1907, Einstein dropped his idea
of obtaining a patent for the device, as he wrote on 24 December to Conrad Habicht, “primarily because of the lack
of interest by manufacturers.” Instead, he published a paper on the basic features of his method, which stimulated
further work on the device.7 While the use of the device
for measuring fluctuation phenomena in conductors proved
to be difficult, experimental work done by others soon provided evidence for the atomistic constitution of matter and
electricity that exceeded Einstein’s initial expectations.
editorial notes
1
Einstein, Autobiographical Notes, Paul Arthur Schilpp, trans. and ed.
(La Salle, Ill.: Open Court, 1979), pp. 44–45.
2
Ibid.
3
Annalen der Physik 19 (1906): 371–381, reprinted in Collected Papers, vol. 2, doc. 32, pp. 334–344.
4
Svedberg, Zeitschrift für Elektrochemie und angewandte physikalische Chemie 12 (1906): 853–854.
5
Einstein, in ibid., 13 (1907): 41–42; reprinted in Collected Papers,
vol. 2, doc. 40, pp. 399–400.
6
Annalen der Physik 22 (1907): 569–572, reprinted in Collected Papers, vol. 2, doc. 39, pp. 393–396.
7
Physikalische Zeitschrift 9 (1908): 216–217, reprinted in Collected
Papers, vol. 2, doc. 48, pp. 490–491.

84

PA P E R 2
✦

On the Motion of Small Particles
Suspended in Liquids at Rest
Required by the
Molecular-Kinetic Theory of Heat

In this paper it will be shown that, according to the
molecular-kinetic theory of heat, bodies of a microscopically
visible size suspended in liquids must, as a result of thermal molecular motions, perform motions of such magnitude
that they can be easily observed with a microscope. It is
possible that the motions to be discussed here are identical with so-called Brownian molecular motion; however, the
data available to me on the latter are so imprecise that I
could not form a judgment on the question.
If the motion to be discussed here can actually be observed, together with the laws it is expected to obey, then
classical thermodynamics can no longer be viewed as applying to regions that can be distinguished even with a microscope, and an exact determination of actual atomic sizes
becomes possible. On the other hand, if the prediction of
this motion were to be proved wrong, this fact would pro85

PAPER 2

vide a far-reaching argument against the molecular-kinetic
conception of heat.
1. On the Osmotic Pressure to Be Ascribed to
Suspended Particles
Let z gram-molecules of a non-electrolyte be dissolved in a
part V ∗ of the total volume V of a liquid. If the volume V ∗ is
separated from the pure solvent by a wall that is permeable
to the solvent but not to the solute, then this wall is subjected to a so-called osmotic pressure, which for sufficiently
large values of V ∗ /z satisfies the equation
pV ∗ = RTz

But if instead of the solute, the partial volume V ∗ of the
liquid contains small suspended bodies that also cannot pass
through the solvent-permeable wall, then, according to the
classical theory of thermodynamics, we should not expect—
at least if we neglect the force of gravity, which does not
interest us here—any pressure to be exerted on the wall;
for according to the usual interpretation, the “free energy”
of the system does not seem to depend on the position of
the wall and of the suspended bodies, but only on the total
mass and properties of the suspended substance, the liquid,
and the wall, as well as on the pressure and temperature. To
be sure, the energy and entropy of the interfaces (capillary
forces) should also be considered when calculating the free
energy; but we can disregard them here because changes in
the position of the wall and suspended bodies will not cause
changes in the size and state of the contact surfaces.
But a different interpretation arises from the standpoint
of the molecular-kinetic theory of heat. According to this
86

MOTION OF SMALL PARTICLES

theory, a dissolved molecule differs from a suspended body
only in size, and it is difficult to see why suspended bodies
should not produce the same osmotic pressure as an equal
number of dissolved molecules. We have to assume that the
suspended bodies perform an irregular, albeit very slow, motion in the liquid due to the liquid’s molecular motion; if
prevented by the wall from leaving the volume V ∗ , they will
exert pressure upon the wall just like molecules in solution.
Thus, if n suspended bodies are present in the volume V ∗ ,
i.e., n/V ∗ = ν in a unit volume, and if neighboring bodies
are sufficiently far separated from each other, there will be
a corresponding osmotic pressure p of magnitude
p = RT∗ n = RT · ν
V N
N

where N denotes the number of actual molecules per
gram-molecule. It will be shown in the next section that the
molecular-kinetic theory of heat does indeed lead to this
broader interpretation of osmotic pressure.
2. Osmotic Pressure from the
Standpoint of the Molecular-Kinetic
Theory of Heat1
If p1 p2    pl are state variables of a physical system that
completely determine the system’s instantaneous state (e.g.,
the coordinates and velocity components of all atoms of the
1
In this section it is assumed that the reader is familiar with the author’s
papers on the foundations of thermodynamics (cf. Ann. d. Phys. 9 [1902]:
417 and 11 [1903]: 170). Knowledge of these papers and of this section
of the present paper is not essential for an understanding of the results
in the present paper.

87

PAPER 2

system), and if the complete system of equations for changes
of these variables is given in the form
∂pν
= ϕν p1    pl
∂t

ν = 1 2    l 

 ∂ϕν
with
∂pν = 0, then the entropy of the system is given by
the expression
S = Ē + 2κ ln
T

 − E
κ
e 2 T dp1    dpl 

Here T denotes the absolute temperature, Ē the energy of
the system, and E the energy as a function of the pν . The
integral extends over all possible values of pν consistent with
the conditions of the problem. κ is connected with the constant N mentioned above by the relation 2κN = R. Hence
we get for the free energy F
F = − R T ln
N

 − EN
e RT dp1    dpl = − RT ln B
N

Let us now imagine a liquid enclosed in volume V ; let
a part V ∗ of the volume V contain n solute molecules or
suspended bodies, which are retained in the volume V ∗ by
a semipermeable wall; the integration limits of the integral
B occurring in the expressions for S and F will be affected
accordingly. Let the total volume of the solute molecules or
suspended bodies be small compared with V ∗ . In accordance
with the theory mentioned, let this system be completely
described by the variables p1    pl 
Even if the molecular picture were extended to include
all details, the calculation of the integral B would be so difficult that an exact calculation of F is hardly conceivable.
However, here we only need to know how F depends on
the size of the volume V ∗ in which all the solute molecules
88

MOTION OF SMALL PARTICLES

or suspended bodies (hereafter called “particles” for brevity)
are contained.
Let us call the rectangular coordinates of the center
of gravity of the first particle x1 , y1 , z1 , those of the second x2 , y2 , z2 , etc., and those of the last particle xn , yn ,
zn , and assign to the centers of gravity of the particles
the infinitesimally small parallelepiped regions dx1 dy1 dz1 ,
dx2 dy2 dz2    dxn dyn dzn , all of which lie in V ∗ . We want
to evaluate the integral occurring in the expression for F ,
with the restriction that the centers of gravity of the particles shall lie in the regions just assigned to them. In any
case, this integral can be put into the form
dB = dx1 dy1    dzn · J 

where J is independent of dx1 dy1 , etc., as well as of V ∗ , i.e,
of the position of the semipermeable wall. But J is also independent of the particular choice of the positions of the center of gravity regions and of the value of V ∗ , as will be shown
immediately. For if a second system of infinitesimally small
regions were assigned to the centers of gravity of the particles and denoted by dx′1 dy1′ dz′1 , dx′2 dy2′ dz′2    dx′n dyn′ dz′n ,
and if these regions differed from the originally assigned
ones by their position alone, but not by their size, and if,
likewise, all of them were contained in V ∗ , we would similarly have
dB′ = dx′1 dy1′    dz′n · J ′ 

where
dx1 dy1    dzn = dx′1 dy1′    dz′n 

Hence,

dB = J 
dB′
J′
89

PAPER 2

But from the molecular theory of heat, as presented in
the papers cited,2 it is easily deduced that dB/B and dB′ /B
are respectively equal to the probabilities that at an arbitrarily chosen moment the centers of gravity of the particles
will be found in the regions dx1    dzn and dx′1    dz′n
respectively. If the motions of the individual particles are
independent of one another (to a sufficient approximation)
and if the liquid is homogeneous and no forces act on the
particles, then for regions of the same size the probabilities
of the two systems of regions will be equal, so that
dB = dB′ 
B
B

But from this equation and the previous one it follows that
J = J ′

This proves that J does not depend on either V ∗ or
x1  y1    zn . By integrating, we get
B=



J dx1    dzn = JV ∗n 

and hence
F = − RT ln J + n ln V ∗ 
N

and
p = − ∂F∗ = RT∗ n = RT ν
∂V
V N
N

This analysis shows that the existence of osmotic pressure
can be deduced from the molecular-kinetic theory of heat,
and that, at high dilution, according to this theory, equal
2

A. Einstein, Ann. d. Phys. 11 (1903): 170.
90

MOTION OF SMALL PARTICLES

numbers of solute molecules and suspended particles behave
identically as regards osmotic pressure.
3. Theory of Diffusion of Small
Suspended Spheres
Suppose suspended particles are randomly distributed in a
liquid. We will investigate their state of dynamic equilibrium
under the assumption that a force K, which depends on the
position but not on the time, acts on the individual particles.
For the sake of simplicity, we shall assume that the force acts
everywhere in the direction of the X-axis.
If the number of suspended particles per unit volume is ν,
then in the case of thermodynamic equilibrium ν is a function of x such that the variation of the free energy vanishes
for an arbitrary virtual displacement δx of the suspended
substance. Thus
δF = δE − T δS = 0

Let us assume that the liquid has a unit cross section perpendicular to the X-axis, and that it is bounded by the planes
x = 0 and x = l. We then have
δE = −

l
0

Kν δx dx

and
δS =

l

R ν ∂δx dx = − R
N ∂x
N
0

l
0

∂ν δx dx
∂x

The required equilibrium condition is therefore
− Kν + RT ∂ν = 0
N ∂x
91

(1)

PAPER 2

or
Kν −

∂p
= 0
∂x

The last equation asserts that the force K is equilibrated by
the force of osmotic pressure.
We can use equation (1) to determine the diffusion coefficient of the suspended substance. We can look upon the dynamic equilibrium state considered here as a superposition
of two processes proceeding in opposite directions, namely:
1. A motion of the suspended substance under the influence of
the force K that acts on each suspended particle.
2. A process of diffusion, which is to be regarded as the result of the disordered motions of the particles produced by
thermal molecular motion.

If the suspended particles have spherical form (where P
is the radius of the sphere) and the coefficient of viscosity
of the liquid is k, then the force K imparts to an individual
particle the velocity3
K 
6πkP

and
νK
6πkP

particles will pass through a unit area per unit time.
Further, if D denotes the diffusion coefficient of the suspended substance and µ the mass of a particle, then
−D

∂ µν
grams
∂x

3
Cf., e.g., G. Kirchhoff, Vorlesungen über Mechanik, 26. Vorl., §4 (Lectures on Mechanics, Lecture 26, sec. 4).

92

MOTION OF SMALL PARTICLES

or
−D ∂ν
∂x

particles will pass across a unit area per unit time as the
result of diffusion. Since dynamic equilibrium prevails, we
must have
νK − D ∂ν = 0
6πkP
∂x

(2)

From the two conditions (1) and (2) found for dynamic
equilibrium, we can calculate the diffusion coefficient. We
get
D = RT · 1 
N 6πkP

Thus, except for universal constants and the absolute temperature, the diffusion coefficient of the suspended substance depends only on the viscosity of the liquid and on
the size of the suspended particles.
4. On the Disordered Motion of Particles
Suspended in a Liquid
and Its Relation to Diffusion
We shall now turn to a closer examination of the disordered
motions that arise from thermal molecular motion and give
rise to the diffusion investigated in the last section.
Obviously, we must assume that each individual particle
executes a motion that is independent of the motions of
all the other particles; the motions of the same particle in
different time intervals must also be considered as mutually
independent processes, so long as we think of these time
intervals as chosen not to be too small.
93

PAPER 2

We now introduce a time interval τ, which is very small
compared with observable time intervals but still large
enough that the motions performed by a particle during two
consecutive time intervals τ can be considered as mutually
independent events.
Suppose, now, that a total of n suspended particles is
present in a liquid. In a time interval τ, the X-coordinates
of the individual particles will increase by , where  has a
different (positive or negative) value for each particle. A certain probability distribution law will hold for : the number
dn of particles experiencing a displacement that lies between
 and  + d in the time interval τ will be expressed by an
equation of the form
dn = nϕ  d

where
 +∞

ϕ  d = 1

−∞

and ϕ differs from zero only for very small values of  and
satisfies the condition
ϕ  = ϕ − 

We will now investigate how the diffusion coefficient depends on ϕ, restricting ourselves again to the case where
the number ν of particles per unit volume only depends on
x and t.
Let ν = f x t be the number of particles per unit volume; we calculate the distribution of particles at time t + τ
from their distribution at time t. From the definition of the
function ϕ  we can easily obtain the number of particles
94

MOTION OF SMALL PARTICLES

found at time t + τ between two planes perpendicular to
the X-axis with abscissas x and x + dx. We get
f x t + τ dx = dx ·

 =+∞
=−∞

f x +  ϕ  d1

But since τ is very small, we can put
f x t + τ = f x t + τ

∂f

∂t

Further, let us expand f x +  t in powers of  
f x +  t = f x t + 

2 ∂ 2 f x t
∂f x t
+
   ad inf.
∂x
2!
∂x2

We can bring this expansion under the integral sign since
only very small values of  contribute anything to the latter.
We obtain
f+

 +∞
∂f
∂f  +∞
ϕ  d +
ϕ  d
·τ =f ·
∂x −∞
∂t
−∞
∂2 f  +∞ 2
ϕ  d   
+ 2
∂x
2
−∞

On the right-hand side, the second, fourth, etc., terms vanish since ϕ x = ϕ −x , while for the first, third, fifth, etc.,
terms, each successive term is very small compared with the
one preceding it. From this equation, by taking into account
that
 +∞

ϕ  d = 1

 +∞

2 ϕ  d = D
2

−∞

and putting
1
τ

−∞

95

PAPER 2

and taking into account only the first and third terms of the
right-hand side, we get
∂2 f
∂f
=D 2
∂t
∂x

(3)

This is the well-known differential equation for diffusion,
and we recognize that D is the diffusion coefficient.
Another important point can be linked to this argument.
We have assumed that the individual particles are all referred to the same coordinate system. However, this is not
necessary since the motions of the individual particles are
mutually independent. We will now refer the motion of each
particle to a coordinate system whose origin coincides with
the position of the center of gravity of the particle in question at time t = 0, with the difference that f x t dx now
denotes the number of particles whose X-coordinate has increased between the times t = 0 and t = t by a quantity
that lies somewhere between x and x + dx. Thus, the function f varies according to equation (1) in this case as well.2
Further, it is obvious that for x  0 and t = 0 we must have
f x t = 0 and

 +∞

f x t dx = n

−∞

The problem, which coincides with the problem of diffusion
outwards from a point (neglecting the interaction between
the diffusing particles), is now completely determined mathematically; its solution is
2

x
− 4Dt
n
e
f x t = √
√ 
t
4πD

The probability distribution of the resulting displacements
during an arbitrary time t is thus the same as the distribution
96

MOTION OF SMALL PARTICLES

of random errors, which was to be expected. What is important, however, is how the constant in the exponent is related
to the diffusion coefficient. With the help of this equation
we can now calculate the displacement λx in the direction
of the X-axis that a particle experiences on the average, or,
to be more precise, the root-mean-square displacement in
the X-direction; it is
λx =



x2 =

√
2Dt

The mean displacement is thus proportional to the square
root of the time. It can easily be shown that the root mean
square of
√ the total displacements of the particles has the
value λx 3 .
5. Formula for the Mean Displacement of
Suspended Particles. A New Method
of Determining the Actual Size of Atoms
In section 3 we found the following value for the diffusion
coefficient D of a substance suspended in a liquid in the
form of small spheres of radius P 
1 
D = RT
N 6πkP

Further, we found in section 4 that the mean value of the
displacements of the particles in the X-direction at time t
equals
λx =

√
2Dt

By eliminating D, we get:
√
λx = t ·



1 
RT
N 3πkP

97

PAPER 2

This equation shows how λx depends on T , k, and P .
We will now calculate how large λx is for one second if
N is taken to be 6 · 1023 in accordance with the results of
the kinetic theory of gases; water at 17◦ C k = 135 · 10−2
is chosen as the liquid,3 and the diameter of the particles
is 0.001 mm. We get
λx = 8 · 10−5 cm = 08 micron.

Therefore, the mean displacement in one minute would be
about 6 microns.
Conversely, the relation can be used to determine N. We
obtain
N = t2 · RT 
λx 3πkP

Let us hope that a researcher will soon succeed in solving
the problem presented here, which is so important for the
theory of heat.
(Annalen der Physik 17 [1905]: 549–560)

editorial notes
1

f on the right-hand side is to be taken at the time t.
Here eq. (1) should be eq. (3).
3
The value of the viscosity of water is taken from paper 1, p. 65, and
actually refers to water at temperature 95◦ C.
2

98

Part Three
✦
Einstein on the Theory of Relativity

Image Not Available

Part of Einstein’s 1912 manuscript on the special theory of relativity, showing the
equation E = mc2 . (Courtesy of Hebrew University of Jerusalem)

Einstein was the first physicist to formulate clearly the
new kinematical foundation for all of physics inherent in
Lorentz’s electron theory. This kinematics emerged in 1905
from his critical examination of the physical significance of
the concepts of spatial and temporal intervals. The examination, based on a careful definition of the simultaneity
of distant events, showed that the concept of a universal
or absolute time, on which Newtonian kinematics is based,
has to be abandoned; and that the Galilean transformations
between the coordinates of two inertial frames of reference has to be replaced by a set of spatial and temporal
transformations that agree formally with a set that Lorentz
had introduced earlier with a quite different interpretation. Through the interpretation of these transformations as
elements of a space-time symmetry group corresponding
to the new kinematics, the special theory of relativity (as it
later came to be called) provided physicists with a powerful guide in the search for new dynamical theories of fields
and particles and gradually led to a deeper appreciation of
the role of symmetry criteria in physics. The special theory of relativity also provided philosophers with abundant
material for reflection on the new views of space and time.
The special theory, like Newtonian mechanics, still assigns a
privileged status to the class of inertial frames of reference.
The attempt to generalize the theory to include gravitation led Einstein to formulate the equivalence principle in
1907. This was the first step in his search for a new theory
of gravitation denying a privileged role to inertial frames, a
theory that is now known as the general theory of relativity.
101

PART THREE

Einstein presented the special theory in paper 3, which is
a landmark in the development of modern physics. In the
first part of this paper Einstein presented the new kinematics, basing it on two postulates, the relativity principle and
the principle of the constancy of the velocity of light. In
the second part, he applied his kinematical results to the
solution of a number of problems in the optics and electrodynamics of moving bodies. In paper 4, Einstein presents
arguments for one of the most important consequences of
the theory, the equivalence of mass and energy.
Strictly speaking, it is anachronistic to use the term “theory
of relativity” in discussing Einstein’s first papers on the subject. In them he referred to the “principle of relativity.” Max
Planck used the term “Relativtheorie” in 1906 to describe the
Lorentz-Einstein equations of motion for the electron, and
this expression continued to be used from time to time for
several years. A. H. Bucherer seems to have been the first
person to use the term “Relativitätstheorie” in the discussion
following Planck’s lecture. The term was used in an article by
Paul Ehrenfest and adopted by Einstein in 1907 in his reply
to this article. Although Einstein used the term from time
to time thereafter, for several years he continued to employ
“Relativitätsprinzip” in the titles of his articles. In 1910 the
mathematician Felix Klein suggested the name “Invariantentheorie” (theory of invariants), but this suggestion does not
seem to have been adopted by any physicist. In 1915 Einstein started to refer to his earlier work as “the special theory
of relativity” to contrast it with his later “general theory.”
In his 1905 paper, as well as in his 1907 and 1909 reviews of
the theory, Einstein described the theory of relativity as arising from a specific problem: the apparent conflict between
102

EINSTEIN ON THE THEORY OF RELATIVITY

the principle of relativity and the Maxwell-Lorentz theory
of electrodynamics. While the relativity principle asserts the
physical equivalence of all inertial frames of reference, the
Maxwell-Lorentz theory implies the existence of a privileged
inertial frame.
The principle of relativity originated in classical mechanics. Assuming Newton’s laws of motion and central force
interactions, it can be demonstrated that it is impossible to
determine the state of motion of an inertial frame by means
of mechanical experiments carried out within a closed system with center of mass at rest in this frame. This conclusion, well known and empirically well confirmed by the end
of the nineteenth century, was sometimes called the principle of relative motion, or principle of relativity.
The introduction of velocity-dependent forces between
charged particles led to doubts about the validity of the
relativity principle for magnetic interactions. The wave theory of light appeared to invalidate the principle for optical
phenomena. This theory seemed to require an all-pervading
medium, the so-called luminiferous ether, to explain the
propagation of light in the absence of ordinary matter. The
assumption that the ether moves together with matter seems
to be excluded by the phenomenon of aberration and by
Fizeau’s results on the velocity of light in moving media. If
the ether is not dragged with matter, it should be possible to
detect motion relative to a reference frame fixed in the ether
by means of optical experiments. However, all attempts to
detect the motion of the earth through the ether by optical
experiments failed.
Maxwell’s electromagnetic theory was intended to provide
a unified explanation of electric, magnetic, and optical phenomena. With its advent, the question arose of the status of
103

PART THREE

the principle of relativity for such phenomena. Does the
principle follow from the fundamental equations of electrodynamics? The answer to this question depends on the
form of Maxwell’s equations postulated for bodies in motion. Hertz developed an electrodynamics of moving bodies,
based on the assumption that the ether moves with matter, in which the relativity principle holds. In addition to its
inability to account for the optical phenomena mentioned
above, Hertz’s theory was unable to explain several new electromagnetic phenomena, and it soon fell out of favor.
By the turn of this century, when Einstein started working on the electrodynamics of moving bodies, Lorentz’s
very successful version of Maxwell’s theory had gained wide
acceptance. Lorentz’s electrodynamics is based on a microscopic theory that came to be known as the electron
theory. The theory makes a sharp distinction between
ordinary, ponderable matter and the ether. Ordinary matter is composed of finite-sized material particles, at least
some of which are electrically charged. All of space, even
those regions occupied by material particles, is pervaded by
the ether, a medium with no mechanical properties, such
as mass. The ether is the seat of all electric and magnetic
fields. Matter only influences the ether through charged
particles, which create these fields. The ether only acts on
matter through the electric and magnetic forces that the
fields exert on charged particles. By assuming such atoms
of electricity (“electrons”), Lorentz’s theory incorporates an
important element of the pre-Maxwellian continental tradition into Maxwell’s theory, from which it took the field
equations.
The parts of the ether are assumed to be immobile relative to each other. Hence, Lorentz’s ether defines a rigid
104

EINSTEIN ON THE THEORY OF RELATIVITY

reference frame, which is assumed to be inertial. It is in this
frame that Maxwell’s equations are valid; in other frames, the
Galilei-transformed form of these equations hold. Hence it
should be possible to detect the motion of the earth through
the ether by suitably designed terrestrial electromagnetic or
optical experiments. Lorentz was well aware of the failure
of all attempts to detect the motion of the earth through
the ether, in particular such sensitive optical attempts as the
Michelson-Morley experiment, and attempted to explain this
failure on the basis of his theory.
His basic approach to this problem in 1895 was to use
the theorem of “corresponding states” in combination with
the well-known contraction hypothesis. The theorem is essentially a calculational tool that sets up a correspondence
between phenomena in moving systems and those in stationary systems by introducing transformed coordinates
and fields. On this basis, Lorentz was able to account for
the failure of most electromagnetic experiments to detect
the motion of the earth through the ether. In 1904 he
showed how to explain the failure of all such experiments
by a generalization of his theorem. He introduced a set
of transformations for the spatial and temporal coordinates
(soon named the “Lorentz transformations” by Poincaré)
and for the electric and magnetic field components, such
that by using these transformations, Maxwell’s equations, in
the absence of charges, take the same form in all inertial
frames. Lorentz’s approach to the explanation of the failure
of attempts to detect motion through the ether, thus, was to
show that the basic equations of the electron theory, in spite
of the fact that they single out the ether rest frame, can
still explain this failure of all optical and electromagnetic
attempts to detect the earth’s motion through the ether.
105

PART THREE

Einstein’s work was based on a new outlook on the problem. Instead of regarding the failure of electromagnetic and
optical experiments to detect the earth’s motion through the
ether as something to be deduced from the electrodynamical equations, he took this failure as empirical evidence for
the validity of the principle of relativity in electrodynamics
and optics. Indeed, he asserted the universal validity of the
principle, making it a criterion for the acceptability of any
physical law. In this respect he gave the principle of relativity a role similar to that of the principles of thermodynamics,
an example that he later stated helped to guide him. Rather
than being deductions from other theories, such principles
are taken as postulates for deductive chains of reasoning, resulting in the formulation of general criteria that all physical
theories must satisfy.
Einstein now confronted the problem of making MaxwellLorentz electrodynamics compatible with the principle of
relativity. He did so by means of a principle drawn from this
very electrodynamics, the principle of the constancy of the
velocity of light. That the velocity of light is independent
of that of its source, and has a constant value in the ether
rest frame, can be deduced from the Maxwell-Lorentz theory. Einstein dropped the ether from that theory and took
the constancy of the velocity of light as a second postulate, supported by all the empirical evidence in favor of the
Maxwell-Lorentz theory. When combined with the relativity
principle, this leads to an apparently paradoxical conclusion:
the velocity of light must be the same in all inertial frames.
This result conflicts with the Newtonian law of addition of
velocities, forcing a revision of the kinematical foundations
underlying all of physics. Einstein showed that the simultaneity of distant events is only defined physically relative
106

EINSTEIN ON THE THEORY OF RELATIVITY

to a particular inertial frame, leading to kinematical transformations between the spatial and temporal coordinates of
two inertial frames that agree formally with the transformations that Lorentz had introduced in 1904.
Einstein next considered the implications of the new kinematics for electrodynamics and mechanics. By eliminating
the concept of the ether, he in effect asserted that electromagnetic fields do not require an underlying substratum. He
showed that the Maxwell-Lorentz equations for empty space
remain invariant in form under the new kinematical transformations when the transformation laws for the electric and
magnetic fields are appropriately defined. He deduced appropriate transformation laws for charge densities and velocities from the requirement that Maxwell’s equations remain
invariant when convection currents are added. Finally, by assuming that Newton’s equations hold for a charged particle
at rest, he was able to use a kinematical transformation to
deduce the equations of motion of a charged particle (“electron”) with arbitrary velocity.
The problems connected with the formulation of an electrodynamics of moving bodies consistent with all experimental evidence were discussed frequently during the years
Einstein was working on his theory. Statements similar to
many of the individual points made in paper 3 occur in the
contemporary literature, and Einstein may well have been
familiar with some of the books and articles in which they
are found. But his approach to the problem, leading to the
peculiar combination of these ideas in his paper, is unique—
particularly the recognition that a new kinematics of universal applicability is needed as the basis for a consistent approach to the electrodynamics of moving bodies.
107

PART THREE

Einstein’s work on relativity grew out of his long-standing
interest in the electrodynamics and optics of moving bodies His first scientific essay, written in 1895, discussed the
propagation of light through the ether. The next year, as
he later recalled, the following problem started to puzzle
him: “If one were to pursue a light wave with the velocity
of light, one would be confronted with a time-independent
wave field. Such a thing doesn’t seem to exist, however! This
was the first childlike thought-experiment concerned with
the special theory of relativity.”1
By this time Einstein presumably was familiar with the
principle of relativity in classical mechanics. While preparing for the ETH entrance examination in 1895, he had studied the German edition of Violle’s textbook. Violle actually
based his treatment of dynamics on the “principle of relative
motions” together with the principle of inertia.
About 1898, Einstein started to study Maxwell’s electromagnetic theory, apparently with the help of Drude’s textbook. By 1899, after studying Hertz’s papers on the subject,
he was at work on the electrodynamics of moving bodies.
He discussed this topic a number of times in letters to
Mileva Marić between 1899 and 1901; once, on 27 March
1901, he referred to “our work on relative motion.” In December 1901, Einstein also explained his ideas on the subject to Professor Alfred Kleiner of the University of Zurich,
who encouraged him to publish them; but there is no evidence that Kleiner played a further role in the development
of these ideas.
Einstein’s comments show that in 1899 his viewpoint on
electrodynamics was similar to that of Lorentz; but, aside
from this similarity, there is no evidence that Einstein had
yet read anything by Lorentz. Shortly afterward, Einstein
108

EINSTEIN ON THE THEORY OF RELATIVITY

designed an experiment to test the effect of the motion of
bodies relative to the ether on the propagation of light; in
1901 he designed a second such experiment, but was unable
to carry out either one. On 17 December 1901, he reported
to Marić that he was at work on “a capital paper” on the electrodynamics of moving bodies, asserting his renewed conviction of the correctness of his “ideas on relative motion.” His
words may indicate that he already doubted whether motion with respect to the ether is experimentally detectable.
Soon afterward he wrote that he intended to study Lorentz’s
theory in earnest.
There is direct or strong indirect contemporary evidence
that, by 1902, Einstein had read or was reading works on
electrodynamics and optics by Drude, Helmholtz, Hertz,
Lorentz, Voigt, Wien, and Föppl. Comments in his letters
on articles published in the Annalen der Physik between
1898 and 1901 indicate that during those years he looked at
that journal regularly as well, and studied a number of articles in it. It is reasonable to suppose that he continued to
do so between 1902 and 1905. During these years a number of significant articles on the electrodynamics and optics
of moving bodies appeared in the Annalen. He cited several
works published before 1905 in his later articles on relativity,
and it is possible that he read one or more of these before
1905. Einstein also read extensively on the foundations of
science. He later attributed great significance for his development of the theory of relativity to his reading of Hume,
Mach, and Poincaré.
Belief in the reality of the ether was widespread at the
turn of the century. However, Einstein was familiar with several works that questioned the certainty of its existence. Mill,
in the course of a discussion of “the Hypothetical Method”
109

PART THREE

in his Logic, gives a number of reasons for skepticism concerning “the prevailing hypothesis of a luminiferous ether.”2
Poincaré, in La science et l’hypothèse, raised the question
of the existence of the ether, even if he offered no clear
answer. Ostwald, in his Lehrbuch der allgemeinen Chemie,
suggested that the ether hypothesis could be replaced by a
purely energetic treatment of radiation.
Few contemporary documents throw any light on Einstein’s work on electrodynamics between 1902 and 1905.
On 22 January 1903, he wrote Michele Besso: “In the near
future I want to deal with molecular forces in gases, and
then make a comprehensive study of electron theory.” On 5
December 1903, Einstein gave a talk to the Naturforschende Gesellschaft Bern on “The Theory of Electromagnetic
Waves.” By the time he wrote his friend Conrad Habicht
in May or June 1905, the theory was practically complete:
“The . . . paper exists only as a sketch and is an electrodynamics of moving bodies that utilizes a modification of the
theory of space and time.”
Later reminiscences by Einstein suggest several important elements in the development of his ideas on relativity
before “On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies” was
written that are not recorded in any known contemporary documents. In a letter to Erika Oppenheimer on 13
September 1932, he gave a general characterization of “the
situation that led to setting up the theory of special relativity”: “Mechanically all inertial systems are equivalent. In
accordance with experience, this equivalence also extends to
optics and electrodynamics. However, it did not appear
that this equivalence could be attained in the theory of the
latter. I soon reached the conviction that this had its basis
in a deep incompleteness of the theoretical system. The
110

EINSTEIN ON THE THEORY OF RELATIVITY

desire to discover and overcome this generated a state of
psychic tension in me that, after seven years of vain searching, was resolved by relativizing the concepts of time and
length.”
In 1952 he wrote: “My direct path to the special theory
of relativity was mainly determined by the conviction that
the electromotive force induced in a conductor moving in
a magnetic field is nothing other than an electric field. But
the result of Fizeau’s experiment and the phenomenon of
aberration also guided me.”3
Beyond their well-known role as evidence against the assumption that the ether is completely carried along by moving matter, it is not clear what role the result of Fizeau’s
experiment and the phenomenon of aberration played in
Einstein’s thinking. Possibly its role depended on the fact
that, in both cases, the observed effect only depends on the
motion of matter (water in the first case, a star in the second) relative to the earth, and not on the presumed motion
of the earth with respect to the ether.
In the case of electromagnetic induction, Einstein gave a
more detailed account of its role. In 1920, he wrote: “In setting up the special theory of relativity, the following . . . idea
about Faraday’s electromagnetic induction played a guiding
role. According to Faraday, relative motion of a magnet and
a closed electric circuit induces an electric current in the latter. Whether the magnet is moved or the conductor doesn’t
matter; only the relative motion is significant. . . . The phenomena of electromagnetic induction . . . compelled me to
postulate the principle of (special) relativity.” In a footnote
he added: “The difficulty to be overcome then lay in the
constancy of the velocity of light in vacuum, which I first
thought would have to be abandoned. Only after groping
111

PART THREE

for years did I realize that the difficulty lay in the arbitrariness of the fundamental concepts of kinematics.”4
His strong belief in the relativity principle and abandonment of “the constancy of the velocity of light in vacuum”
led Einstein to explore the possibility of an emission theory
of light. In such a theory, the velocity of light is only constant relative to that of its source, so it is clearly consistent
with the relativity principle. Newton’s corpuscular theory of
light is an emission theory, and Einstein’s search for such
a theory may have been connected with his light-quantum
hypothesis (see paper 5). On 25 April 1912, in a letter to
Paul Ehrenfest commenting on Ritz’s emission theory, Einstein referred to “Ritz’s conception, which before the theory
of relativity was also mine.” He expanded on this remark on
20 June: “I knew that the principle of the constancy of the
velocity of light was something quite independent of the relativity postulate, and I weighed which was more probable,
the principle of the constancy of c [the speed of light], as
required by Maxwell’s equations, or the constancy of c exclusively for an observer located at the light source. I decided
in favor of the former.”
In 1924, Einstein described the sudden resolution of his
dilemma: “After seven years of reflection in vain (1898–
1905), the solution came to me suddenly with the thought
that our concepts and laws of space and time can only claim
validity insofar as they stand in a clear relation to our experiences; and that experience could very well lead to the
alteration of these concepts and laws. By a revision of the
concept of simultaneity into a more malleable form, I thus
arrived at the special theory of relativity.”5
In a talk at Kyoto University in 1922, Einstein is reported
to have said that, after a year of struggle with the problem of
112

EINSTEIN ON THE THEORY OF RELATIVITY

how to reconcile Lorentz’s theory with his ideas on relativity,
he visited a friend one day to discuss the problem in detail
with him. The next day Einstein said to his friend: “Thanks
to you, I have completely solved my problem.”6 The friend
was presumably Michele Besso, then his colleague at the
Swiss Patent Office and the only person whose help is
acknowledged in paper 3.
Work on this paper was apparently completed very rapidly
after this. In March 1952 Einstein wrote to Carl Seelig that
“between the conception of the idea for the special theory
of relativity and the completion of the relevant publication,
five or six weeks elapsed.”
Einstein’s comments suggest the following stages in his
work on the theory of relativity:
1. He became convinced that, as is the case for mechanical
phenomena, only the relative motions of ponderable bodies are significant in determining electromagnetic and optical
phenomena; at some point, this conviction led him to abandon the concept of the ether.
2. He temporarily abandoned Lorentz’s theory of electrodynamics, which appears to attach physical significance to absolute motion (i.e., motion with respect to empty space or the
ether).
3. He explored the possibility of an alternative electrodynamical
theory, which would justify the emission hypothesis about the
constancy of the velocity of light relative to its source.
4. Abandoning such attempts, he reexamined Lorentz’s theory,
at some point focusing his concern on the conflict of his ideas
on relative motion with a particular consequence of Lorentz’s
theory: the independence of velocity of light of the velocity
of its source.
113

PART THREE

5. He recognized that this conflict involves previously tacitly
accepted kinematical assumptions about temporal and spatial
intervals, leading him to examine the meaning of the concept
of the simultaneity of distant events.
6. He defined simultaneity physically, and constructed a new
kinematical theory based on the relativity principle and the
light principle, thus resolving the apparent conflict between
them.

There have been a number of attempts at a detailed
reconstruction of Einstein’s development of the theory of
relativity, attempts which often differ significantly in their
conclusions. Such a reconstruction has to take into account
other strands in Einstein’s work at this time. In particular,
by the time he wrote the relativity paper, he no longer regarded Maxwell’s electromagnetic theory as universally valid,
and had already proposed his light quantum hypothesis (see
paper 5). He had also shown that the equipartition theorem,
which his work on the foundations of thermodynamics convinced him is valid for the most general classical-mechanical
system, combined with Maxwell’s theory, leads to an incorrect law for black-body radiation (see section 1 of paper 5).
Thus, he already had challenged the unlimited validity of
both classical mechanics and of Maxwell’s theory.
Einstein later recalled that, uncertain how to proceed in
the search for better theories of the structure of matter
and radiation, he became convinced that “only the discovery of a universal formal principle could lead . . . to assured
results.”7 Such principles play a role analogous in this respect with the role played by the principles of thermodynamics. The theory of relativity is based on just such principles:
even though suggested originally by specific mechanical and
114

EINSTEIN ON THE THEORY OF RELATIVITY

electromagnetic theories, the principles of relativity and of
the constancy of the velocity of light are supported by empirical evidence that is independent of the validity of these
theories.
According to his sister’s memoir, Einstein was anxious
about whether his relativity paper would be accepted by the
Annalen der Physik. After it was accepted, he eagerly anticipated an immediate reaction to its publication, even though
he expected it to be critical. He was greatly disappointed
when his paper was not even mentioned in the following
issues of the Annalen. Sometime afterward, she recounts,
he received a letter from Planck, requesting explanations of
a few obscure points in the work. “After the long period
of waiting, this was the first sign that his paper was being
read at all. The happiness of the young scholar was all the
greater, since acknowledgment of his accomplishment came
from one of the greatest contemporary physicists. . . . At
that time Planck’s interest signified infinitely much for the
morale of the young physicist.”8
Planck and Einstein continued to correspond, and during
the fall of 1905 Planck discussed Einstein’s paper in the University of Berlin’s physics colloquium. During the next few
years, Planck wrote several papers developing further consequences of the relativity principle, and interested his
assistant, Max Laue, and one of his students, Kurd von
Mosengeil, in working on related problems. A few years
later, Einstein paid tribute to Planck’s role in promoting
the theory of relativity: “The attention that this theory so
quickly received from colleagues is surely to be ascribed in
large part to the resoluteness and warmth with which he
intervened for this theory.”9
115

PART THREE

Other physicists also started to discuss Einstein’s work in
1905 and 1906. Two months after it appeared, Kaufmann
cited it in a preliminary report of his recent experiments
on the mass of electrons in β-rays. The following year, in a
fuller discussion of his results, while noting that the two theories yield the same equations of motion for the electron, he
gave the first clear account of the basic theoretical difference
between Lorentz’s and Einstein’s views. Drude, the editor
of the Annalen, cited Einstein’s paper in the second edition
of his standard text on optics, as well as in an article on optics in the Handbuch der Physik. Wilhelm Röntgen wrote to
Einstein asking for copies of his papers on electrodynamics,
presumably in connection with a talk Röntgen was to give on
the equations of motion of the electron. Sommerfeld, who
heard the talk, soon read Einstein’s work and was so impressed that he decided to give a colloquium on it. During
1907, Einstein was in correspondence about the theory
with Planck, Laue, Wien, and Minkowski. In the same year,
he was asked to write a review article on relativity, which
appeared in Stark’s Jahrbuch der Radioaktivität at the end
of the year, and a major publishing house inquired about
the possibility of a book on his research. A reference by
Ehrenfest in 1907 to Einstein’s theory as a “closed system”
led Einstein to clarify his view of the nature of the theory.
By 1908, the theory of relativity, though still controversial
and often not clearly distinguished from Lorentz’s electron theory, was a major topic of discussion among leading
German-speaking physicists.
Since the theory of relativity grew out of Einstein’s longstanding concern with electrodynamics, and his applications
of the theory were primarily in this field, the theory was
116

EINSTEIN ON THE THEORY OF RELATIVITY

often looked upon as essentially another version of Lorentz’s
electron theory. Einstein soon felt the need to make clear
the distinction between the kinematical results of the theory,
deduced from the two principles of the theory, and the use
of such kinematical results in the solution of problems in the
optics and electrodynamics of moving bodies, the derivation
of the equations of motion of a charged particle—or indeed
in any physical theory. He pointed out that the postulates
of the theory do not constitute a “closed system” but only
a “heuristic principle, which considered by itself alone only
contains assertions about rigid bodies, clocks, and light signals.” Beyond such assertions, the theory could only establish
“relations between otherwise apparently independent laws”
of physics.10
A few months after first publishing the theory of relativity, Einstein discovered something that particularly intrigued him: the relation between inertial mass and energy.
He wrote to Conrad Habicht during the summer of 1905:
“One more consequence of the paper on electrodynamics
has also occurred to me. The principle of relativity, in conjunction with Maxwell’s equations, requires that mass be a
direct measure of the energy contained in a body; light carries mass with it. A noticeable decrease of mass should occur
in the case of radium. The argument is amusing and seductive; but for all I know the Lord might be laughing over it
and leading me around by the nose.”
The idea that inertial mass is associated with electromagnetic energy was often discussed before 1905. Around the
turn of the century, it was suggested that all mechanical concepts might be derivable from those of electromagnetism.
In particular, there were attempts to derive the entire inertial mass of the electron from the energy associated with its
117

PART THREE

electromagnetic field. It was also proved that a radiationfilled container manifests an apparent inertial mass, which
(if the mass of the container is neglected) is proportional to
the energy of the enclosed radiation.
In paper 4, Einstein argued that, as a consequence of the
relativity principle, inertial mass is associated with all forms
of energy. He was only able to establish this result for a
process involving the emission of electromagnetic radiation
by a system, but argued that the result is independent of the
mechanism by which the system loses energy. In addition, he
was only able to show that a change in energy is associated
with a change in inertial mass equal to the change in energy
divided by c2 . His argument was criticized in 1907 by Planck,
who presented his own argument to show that a transfer of
heat is associated with a similarly related transfer of inertial
mass.
Soon afterward, Stark attributed the discovery of the relation between mass and energy to Planck. Einstein wrote
Stark on 17 February 1908: “I was rather disturbed that you
do not acknowledge my priority with regard to the connection
between inertial mass and energy.” After receiving a conciliatory reply from Stark, acknowledging his priority, Einstein
replied on 22 February, regretting his original testy reaction:
“People, to whom it is granted to contribute something to the
progress of science, should not allow pleasure in the fruits of
their common work to be clouded by such matters.”
Einstein returned to the relation between inertial mass
and energy in 1906 and in 1907, giving more general arguments for their complete equivalence, but he did not
achieve the complete generality to which he aspired. In his
1909 Salzburg talk, Einstein strongly emphasized that inertial mass is a property of all forms of energy, and therefore
118

EINSTEIN ON THE THEORY OF RELATIVITY

electromagnetic radiation must have mass. This conclusion
strengthened Einstein’s belief in the hypothesis that light
quanta manifest particle-like properties.
In 1905, Einstein proposed a number of other experimentally testable consequences of his theory, in particular the
equations of motion of the electron. The following year he
suggested an experimental test of these equations employing
cathode rays.11
In this paper, he also mentioned Kaufmann’s experimental
investigations of the motion of electrons in β-rays. Starting
in 1901, Kaufmann had carried out a series of experiments
on the deflection of β-rays by electric and magnetic fields. In
1905 he asserted that his recent experiments yielded data for
the dependence of mass on velocity that were incompatible
with the (identical) predictions of the Lorentz and Einstein
theories. Kaufmann’s work occasioned considerable discussion. Lorentz was disheartened by the apparent refutation
of his theory. Planck subjected the experiment to a careful
analysis, and concluded that Kaufmann’s work could not be
regarded as a definitive refutation of the Lorentz-Einstein
predictions. Röntgen, one of the leading German experimentalists, is reported also to have felt that Kaufmann’s
results were not decisive, because his observations were not
that accurate. In a 1907 review, Einstein discussed Kaufmann’s results at some length, especially their apparent
irreconcilability with the Lorentz-Einstein predictions.
Commenting on a figure showing Kaufmann’s results and
the relativistic predictions, Einstein wrote: “Considering the
difficulty of the experiment, one might be inclined to regard the agreement as satisfactory.” However, he noted that
the deviations were systematic and well outside Kaufmann’s
error limits. “Whether the systematic deviations are based
119

PART THREE

upon a source of error not yet considered, or on lack of
correspondence between the foundations of the theory of
relativity and the facts, can only be decided with certainty
when more manifold observational data are at hand.”12
Although Einstein evidently accepted experiment as the
ultimate arbiter of the fate of the theory, he was cautious
about accepting Kaufmann’s results as definitive, perhaps
because of his familiarity with Planck’s critical analysis of
the experiments. What he found even more difficult to accept were alternative equations of motion for the electron
that are based on what he regarded as arbitrary dynamical
assumptions about the shape of a moving electron. While
conceding that Kaufmann’s data seemed to favor the theories of Abraham and Bucherer, Einstein concluded: “In my
opinion, however, a rather small probability should be ascribed to these theories, since their fundamental assumptions about the mass of a moving electron are not supported by theoretical systems that embrace wider complexes
of phenomena.”13
This cautious attitude toward Kaufmann’s results proved
justified. During the following years, controversies over the
interpretation of the experimental results prevented them
from playing a decisive role in contemporary evaluations of
the theory of relativity. Bestelmeyer carried out β-ray experiments generally regarded as inconclusive, while Bucherer’s
results favoring the Lorentz-Einstein equations were seriously questioned. Experiments using cathode rays, reported
by several investigators starting in 1910, proved similarly inconclusive. Almost a decade elapsed until data supporting
the relativistic predictions (the 1916 results of Guye and
Lavanchy) were generally accepted.
120

EINSTEIN ON THE THEORY OF RELATIVITY

editorial notes
1

Einstein, “Erinnerungen—Souvenirs,” Schweizerische Hochschulzeitung 28 (Sonderheft) (1955): 146.
2
John Stuart Mill, A System of Logic Ratiocinative and Inductive:
Being a Connected View of the Principles of Evidence and the Methods of
Scientific Investigation, 8th ed. (London: Longmans, Green, Reader and
Dyer, 1872; 1st ed., 1843), vol. 2, pp. 12, 20, 23.
3
Message by Einstein, prepared for R. S. Shankland to read at a celebration of the centennial of Michelson’s birth, 19 December 1952, at
Case Institute.
4
Unpublished manuscript, entitled “Fundamental Ideas and Methods
of the Theory of Relativity, Presented as It Developed,” copy in Einstein
Editorial Archive, Boston University.
5
Recording, transcribed in Friedrich Herneck, “Zwei Tondokumente Einsteins zur Relativitätstheorie,” Forschungen und Fortschritte
40 (1966): 134.
6
See the report of Einstein’s talk, given on 14 December 1922, in Jun
Ishiwara, Einstein Kyôzyu-Kôen-roku (Tokyo: Kabushika Kaisha, 1971),
pp. 78–88.
7
Einstein, Autobiographical Notes, Paul Arthur Schilpp, trans. and ed.
(La Salle, Ill.: Open Court, 1979), p. 48.
8
Maja Winteler-Einstein, “Albert Einstein: Beitrag für sein Lebensbild,” typescript, pp. 23–24, Einstein Editorial Archive, Boston University.
9
Die Naturwissenschaften 1 (1913): 1079, reprinted in Collected Papers, vol. 4, doc. 23, pp. 561–563.
10
Einstein, “Comments on the Note of Mr. Paul Ehrenfest: ‘The
Translatory Motion of Deformable Electrons and the Area Law,’ ” Collected Papers, vol. 2, doc. 44, pp. 410-412.
11
Annalen der Physik 21 (1906): 583–586, reprinted in Collected Papers, vol. 2, doc. 36, pp. 368–371.
12
Jahrbuch der Radioaktivität und Elektronik 4 (1907): 433–462, citation on pp. 437–439, reprinted in Collected Papers, vol. 2, doc. 47,
pp. 433–484.
13
Ibid.

121

This page intentionally left blank

PA P E R 3
✦

On the Electrodynamics
of Moving Bodies

It is well known that Maxwell’s electrodynamics—as usually understood at present—when applied to moving bodies,
leads to asymmetries that do not seem to be inherent in the
phenomena. Take, for example, the electrodynamic interaction between a magnet and a conductor. The observable
phenomenon here depends only on the relative motion of
conductor and magnet, whereas the customary view draws a
sharp distinction between the two cases, in which either the
one or the other of the two bodies is in motion. For if the
magnet is in motion and the conductor is at rest, an electric field with a definite energy value results in the vicinity
of the magnet that produces a current wherever parts of the
conductor are located. But if the magnet is at rest while the
conductor is moving, no electric field results in the vicinity
of the magnet, but rather an electromotive force in the conductor, to which no energy per se corresponds, but which,
assuming an equality of relative motion in the two cases,
gives rise to electric currents of the same magnitude and
123

PAPER 3

the same course as those produced by the electric forces in
the former case.
Examples of this sort, together with the unsuccessful attempts to detect a motion of the earth relative to the “light
medium,” lead to the conjecture that not only the phenomena of mechanics but also those of electrodynamics have no
properties that correspond to the concept of absolute rest.
Rather, the same laws of electrodynamics and optics will be
valid1 for all coordinate systems in which the equations of
mechanics hold, as has already been shown for quantities of
the first order. We shall raise this conjecture (whose content
will hereafter be called “the principle of relativity”) to the
status of a postulate and shall also introduce another postulate, which is only seemingly incompatible with it, namely
that light always propagates in empty space with a definite
velocity V that is independent of the state of motion of the
emitting body. These two postulates suffice for the attainment of a simple and consistent electrodynamics of moving
bodies based on Maxwell’s theory for bodies at rest. The introduction of a “light ether” will prove to be superfluous,
inasmuch as the view to be developed here will not require
a “space at absolute rest” endowed with special properties,
nor assign a velocity vector to a point of empty space where
electromagnetic processes are taking place.
Like all electrodynamics, the theory to be developed here
is based on the kinematics of a rigid body, since the assertions of any such theory have to do with the relations among
rigid bodies (coordinate systems), clocks, and electromagnetic processes. Insufficient regard for this circumstance is
at the root of the difficulties with which the electrodynamics
of moving bodies currently has to contend.
124

ELECTRODYNAMICS OF MOVING BODIES

A. Kinematic Part
1. Definition of Simultaneity
Consider a coordinate system in which Newton’s mechanical
equations are valid. To distinguish this system verbally from
those to be introduced later, and to make our presentation
more precise, we will call it the “rest system.”
If a particle is at rest relative to this coordinate system, its
position relative to the latter can be determined by means
of rigid measuring rods using the methods of Euclidean geometry and expressed in Cartesian coordinates.
If we want to describe the motion of a particle, we give
the values of its coordinates as functions of time. However,
we must keep in mind that a mathematical description of
this kind only has physical meaning if we are already clear
as to what we understand here by “time.” We have to bear
in mind that all our judgments involving time are always
judgments about simultaneous events. If, for example, I say
that “the train arrives here at 7 o’clock,” that means, more
or less, “the pointing of the small hand of my watch to 7 and
the arrival of the train are simultaneous events.”1
It might seem that all difficulties involved in the definition
of “time” could be overcome by my substituting “position of
the small hand of my watch” for “time.” Such a definition
is indeed sufficient if a time is to be defined exclusively for
the place at which the watch is located; but the definition
is no longer satisfactory when series of events occurring at
different locations have to be linked temporally, or—what
1

We shall not discuss here the imprecision inherent in the concept
of simultaneity of two events taking place at (approximately) the same
location, which can be removed only by an abstraction.
125

PAPER 3

amounts to the same thing—when events occurring at places
remote from the clock have to be evaluated temporally.
To be sure, we could content ourselves with evaluating the
time of events by stationing an observer with a clock at the
origin of the coordinates who assigns to an event to be evaluated the corresponding position of the hands of the clock
when a light signal from that event reaches him through
empty space. However, we know from experience that such
a coordination has the drawback of not being independent
of the position of the observer with the clock. We reach a
far more practical arrangement by the following argument.
If there is a clock at point A in space, then an observer
located at A can evaluate the time of events in the immediate vicinity of A by finding the positions of the hands of
the clock that are simultaneous with these events. If there
is another clock at point B that in all respects resembles the
one at A, then the time of events in the immediate vicinity of B can be evaluated by an observer at B. But it is not
possible to compare the time of an event at A with one at
B without a further stipulation. So far we have defined only
an “A-time” and a “B-time,” but not a common “time” for A
and B. The latter can now be determined by establishing by
definition that the “time” required for light to travel from A
to B is equal to the “time” it requires to travel from B to A.
For, suppose a ray of light leaves from A for B at “A-time”
tA , is reflected from B toward A at “B-time” tB , and arrives
back at A at “A-time” tA′ . The two clocks are synchronous
by definition if
tB − tA = tA′ − tB 

We assume that it is possible for this definition of synchronism to be free of contradictions, and to be so for arbitrarily
126

ELECTRODYNAMICS OF MOVING BODIES

many points, and therefore that the following relations are
generally valid:
1. If the clock at B runs synchronously with the clock at A, the
clock at A runs synchronously with the clock at B
2. If the clock at A runs synchronously with the clock at B as
well as with the clock at C, then the clocks at B and C also
run synchronously relative to each other.

By means of certain (imagined) physical experiments, we
have established what is to be understood by synchronous
clocks at rest relative to each other and located at different
places, and thereby obviously arrived at definitions of “synchronous” and “time.” The “time” of an event is the reading
obtained simultaneously from a clock at rest that is located
at the place of the event, which for all time determinations
runs synchronously with a specified clock at rest, and indeed
with the specified clock.
Based on experience, we further stipulate that the quantity
2 AB = V
tA′ − tA

be a universal constant (the velocity of light in empty space).
It is essential that we have defined time by means of clocks
at rest in the rest system; because the time just defined is
related to the system at rest, we call it “the time of the rest
system.”
2. On the Relativity of Lengths and Times
The following considerations are based on the principle of
relativity and the principle of the constancy of the velocity
of light. We define these two principles as follows:
127

PAPER 3

1. If two coordinate systems are in uniform parallel translational motion relative to each other, the laws according to
which the states of a physical system change do not depend
on which of the two systems these changes are related to.
2. Every light ray moves in the “rest” coordinate system with a
fixed velocity V , independently of whether this ray of light is
emitted by a body at rest or in motion. Hence,
light path

time interval
where “time interval” should be understood in the sense of
the definition given in section 1.
velocity =

Take a rigid rod at rest; let its length, measured by a measuring rod that is also at rest, be l. Now imagine the axis of
the rod placed along the X-axis of the rest coordinate system, and the rod then set into uniform parallel translational
motion (with velocity v along the X-axis in the direction of
increasing x. We now inquire about the length of the moving rod, which we imagine to be ascertained by the following
two operations:
a. The observer moves together with the aforementioned measuring rod and the rigid rod to be measured, and measures
the length of the rod by laying out the measuring rod in the
same way as if the rod to be measured, the observer, and the
measuring rod were all at rest.
b. Using clocks at rest and synchronous in the rest system as
outlined in section 1, the observer determines at which points
of the rest system the beginning and end of the rod to be
measured are located at some given time t. The distance between these two points, measured with the rod used before—
but now at rest—is also a length that we can call the “length
of the rod.”
128

ELECTRODYNAMICS OF MOVING BODIES

According to the principle of relativity, the length determined by operation (a), which we shall call “the length of
the rod in the moving system,” must equal the length l of the
rod at rest.
The length determined using operation (b), which we
shall call “the length of the (moving) rod in the rest system,” will be determined on the basis of our two principles,
and we shall find that it differs from l
Current kinematics tacitly assumes that the lengths determined by the above two operations are exactly equal to
each other, or, in other words, that at the time t a moving
rigid body is totally replaceable, in geometric respects, by
the same body when it is at rest in a particular position.
Further, we imagine the two ends (A and B of the rod
equipped with clocks that are synchronous with the clocks
of the rest system, i.e., whose readings always correspond to
the “time of the system at rest” at the locations the clocks
happen to occupy; hence, these clocks are “synchronous in
the rest system.”
We further imagine that each clock has an observer comoving with it, and that these observers apply to the two
clocks the criterion for the synchronous rate of two clocks
formulated in section 1. Let a ray of light start out from
A at time2 tA ; it is reflected from B at time tB , and arrives
back at A at time tA′ . Taking into account the principle of
the constancy of the velocity of light, we find that
tB − tA =

rAB
V −v

2
“Time” here means both “time of the system at rest” and “the position
of the hands of the moving clock located at the place in question.”

129

PAPER 3

and
tA′ − tB =

rAB

V +v

where rAB denotes the length of the moving rod, measured
in the rest system. Observers co-moving with the rod would
thus find that the two clocks do not run synchronously, while
observers in the system at rest would declare them to be
running synchronously.
Thus we see that we cannot ascribe absolute meaning to
the concept of simultaneity; instead, two events that are simultaneous when observed from some particular coordinate
system can no longer be considered simultaneous when observed from a system that is moving relative to that system.
3. Theory of Transformations of Coordinate
and Time from the Rest System to a System
in Uniform Translational Motion
Relative to It
Let there be two coordinate systems in the “rest” space, i.e.,
two systems of three mutually perpendicular rigid material
lines originating from one point. Let the X-axes of the two
systems coincide, and their Y - and Z-axes be respectively
parallel. Each system shall be supplied with a rigid measuring rod and a number of clocks, and let both measuring rods
and all the clocks of the two systems be exactly alike.
Now, put the origin of one of the two systems, say k, in a
state of motion with (constant) velocity v in the direction of
increasing x of the other system K, which remains at rest;
and let this new velocity be imparted to k’s coordinate axes,
its corresponding measuring rod, and its clocks. To each time
t of the rest system K, there corresponds a definite location
130

ELECTRODYNAMICS OF MOVING BODIES

of the axes of the moving system. For reasons of symmetry
we are justified to assume that the motion of k can be such
that at time t (“t” always denotes a time of the rest system)
the axes of the moving system are parallel to the axes of the
rest system.
We now imagine space to be measured out from both the
rest system K using the measuring rod at rest, and from the
moving system k using the measuring rod moving along with
it, and that coordinates x, y, z and ξ, η, ζ respectively are
obtained in this way. Further, by means of the clocks at rest
in the rest system, and using light signals as described in
section 1, we determine the time t of the rest system for
all the points where there are clocks. In a similar manner,
by again applying the method of light signals described in
section 1, we determine the time τ of the moving system,
for all points of this moving system at which there are clocks
at rest relative to this system.
To every set of values x, y, z, t which completely determines the place and time of an event in the rest system,
there corresponds a set of values ξ, η, ζ, τ that fixes this
event relative to the system k, and the problem to be solved
now is to find the system of equations that connects these
quantities.
First of all, it is clear that these equations must be linear
because of the properties of homogeneity that we attribute
to space and time.
If we put x′ = x − vt, then it is clear that a point at rest in
the system k has a definite, time-independent set of values x′ ,
y, z belonging to it. We first determine τ as a function of x′ , y,
z, and t. To this end, we must express in equations that τ is
in fact the aggregate of readings of clocks at rest in system k,
synchronized according to the rule given in section 1.
131

PAPER 3

Suppose that at time τ0 , a light ray is sent from the origin
of the system k along the X-axis to x′ and reflected from
there toward the origin at time τ1 , arriving there at time τ2 ;
we then must have
1 τ + τ  = τ 
2
1
2 0

or, including the arguments of the function τ and applying
the principle of the constancy of the velocity of light in the
rest system,




1 τ0 0 0 t + τ 0 0 0 t + x′ + x′
2
V −v V +v


′

= τ x′  0 0 t + x
V −v

From this we get, letting x′ be infinitesimally small,

or



1 + 1
∂τ = ∂τ + 1 ∂τ 
1
2 V − v V + v ∂t
∂x′
V − v ∂t
∂τ +
v
∂τ = 0
∂x′
V 2 − v2 ∂t

It should be noted that, instead of the coordinate origin,
we could have chosen any other point as the origin of the
light ray, and therefore the equation just derived holds for
all values of x′ , y, z
Analogous reasoning—applied to the H 2 and Z axes—
yields, remembering that
√ light always propagates along these
axes with the velocity V 2 − v2 when observed from the rest
system,
∂τ = 0
∂y
∂τ = 0
∂z
132

ELECTRODYNAMICS OF MOVING BODIES

These equations yield, since τ is a linear function,

τ =a t−

v
V 2 − v2


x′ 

where a is a function ϕv as yet unknown, and where we
assume for brevity that at the origin of k we have t = 0
when τ = 0
Using this result, we can easily determine the quantities
ξ, η, ζ by expressing in equations that (as demanded by
the principle of the constancy of the velocity of light in conjunction with the principle of relativity) light also propagates
with velocity V when measured in the moving system. For a
light ray emitted at time τ = 0 in the direction of increasing
ξ, we have
ξ = Vτ

or

ξ = aV t −

v
V 2 − v2


x′ 

But as measured in the rest system, the light ray propagates
with velocity V − v relative to the origin of k, so that
x′ = t
V −v

Substituting this value of t in the equation for ξ, we obtain
ξ=a

V2
V 2 − v2

x′ 

Analogously, by considering light rays moving along the two
other axes, we get

η = Vτ = aV t −
133


v
′
x

V 2 − v2

PAPER 3

where

hence

and

y
= t
√
V 2 − v2

x′ = 0

η = a√ V
y
V 2 − v2
z
ζ = a√ V
V 2 − v2

If we substitute for x′ its value, we obtain


τ = ϕv β t − v2 x 
V
ξ = ϕv βx − vt
η = ϕvy
ζ = ϕvz

where
β=

1
 2
1− v
V

and ϕ is an as yet unknown function of v. If no assumptions
are made regarding the initial position of the moving system
and the zero point of τ, then a constant must be added to
the right-hand sides of these equations.
Now we have to prove that, measured in the moving system, every light ray propagates with the velocity V , if it does
so, as we have assumed, in the rest system; for we have not
yet proved that the principle of the constancy of the velocity
of light is compatible with the relativity principle.
Suppose that at time t = τ = 0 a spherical wave is emitted
from the coordinate origin, which at that time is common to
134

ELECTRODYNAMICS OF MOVING BODIES

both systems, and that this wave propagates in the system K
with the velocity V . Hence, if x y z is a point reached by
this wave, we have
x2 + y 2 + z2 = V 2 t 2 

We transform this equation using our transformation
equations and, after a simple calculation, obtain
ξ 2 + η2 + ζ 2 = V 2 τ 2 

Thus, our wave is also a spherical wave with propagation velocity V when it is observed in the moving
system. This proves that our two fundamental principles are
compatible.3
The transformation equations we have derived also contain an unknown function ϕ of v, which we now wish to
determine.
To this end we introduce a third coordinate system K′ ,
which, relative to the system k, is in parallel-translational
motion, parallel to the axis ,4 such that its origin moves
along the -axis with velocity −v. Let all three coordinate
origins coincide at time t = 0, and let the time t ′ of system
K′ equal zero at t = x = y = z = 0. We denote the coordinates measured in the system K′ by x′  y ′  z′ and, by twofold
application of our transformation equations, we get
t ′ = ϕ−vβ−v τ + v2 ξ = ϕvϕ−vt
V
x′ = ϕ−vβ−vξ + vτ

= ϕvϕ−vx

y ′ = ϕ−vη

= ϕvϕ−vy

z′ = ϕ−vζ

= ϕvϕ−vz
135

PAPER 3

Since the relations between x′  y ′  z′ and x y z do not
contain the time t, the systems K and K′ are at rest relative
to each other, and it is clear that the transformation from K
to K′ must be the identity transformation. Hence,
ϕvϕ−v = 1

Let us now explore the meaning of ϕv. We shall focus on
that portion of the H-axis of the system k that lies between
ξ = 0, η = 0, ζ = 0, and ξ = 0, η = l, ζ = 0. This portion
of the H-axis is a rod that, relative to the system K, moves
perpendicular to its axis with a velocity v and its ends have
coordinates in K:
l 
ϕv

x1 = vt

y1 =

x2 = vt

y2 = 0

z1 = 0

and
z2 = 0

The length of the rod, measured in K, is thus l/ϕv; this
gives us the meaning of the function ϕ. For reasons of symmetry, it is now evident that the length of a rod measured in
the rest system and moving perpendicular to its axis can depend only on its velocity and not on the direction and sense
of its motion. Thus, the length of the moving rod measured
in the rest system does not change if v is replaced by −v.
From this we conclude:
l 
l =
ϕv
ϕ−v

or
ϕv = ϕ−v

From this relation and the one found earlier it follows that
ϕv = 1, so that the transformation equations obtained
136

ELECTRODYNAMICS OF MOVING BODIES

become


τ = β t − v2 x 
V
ξ = βx − vt
η = y
ζ = z

where
β=

1
 2 
1− v
V

4. The Physical Meaning of the Equations
Obtained as Concerns Moving Rigid Bodies
and Moving Clocks
We consider a rigid sphere3 of radius R that is at rest relative
to the moving system k and whose center lies at the origin of
k. The equation of the surface of this sphere, which moves
with velocity v relative to the system k, is
ξ2 + η2 + ζ 2 = R2 

Expressed in terms of x, y, z, the equation of this surface at
time t = 0 is


x2
2
2
2
 2 2 + y + z = R 
1− v
V

A rigid body that has a spherical shape when measured
at rest has, when in motion—considered from the rest
3

I.e., a body that has a spherical shape when examined at rest.
137

PAPER 3

system—the shape of an ellipsoid of revolution with axes
R 1−

 2
v  R R
V

Thus, while the Y and Z dimensions of the sphere (and
hence also of every rigid body, whatever its shape) do not
appear to be altered by motion, the X dimension appears to
be contracted in the ratio 1  1 − v/V 2 , thus the greater
the value of v, the greater the contraction. For v = V , all
moving objects—considered from the “rest” system—shrink
into plane structures. For superluminal velocities our considerations become meaningless; as we shall see from later
considerations, in our theory the velocity of light physically
plays the role of infinitely great velocities.
It is clear that the same results apply for bodies at rest in
the “rest” system when considered from a uniformly moving
system.
We further imagine one of the clocks that is able to indicate time t when at rest relative to the rest system and time
τ when at rest relative to the moving system to be placed
at the origin of k and set such that it indicates the time τ.
What is the rate of this clock when considered from the rest
system?
The quantities x, t, and τ that refer to the position of this
clock obviously satisfy the equations
τ=

1
 2
1− v
V



and
x = vt
138


t − v2 x
V

ELECTRODYNAMICS OF MOVING BODIES

We thus have

 2
v
=t− 1−
τ =t 1−
V

 2 
1− v
t
V

from which it follows that the reading of the clock considered from the rest system lags behind each second by
1 − 1 − v/V 2  sec or, up to quantities of the fourth and
higher order, by 21 v/V 2 sec.
This yields the following peculiar consequence: If at the
points A and B of K there are clocks at rest that, considered
from the rest system, are running synchronously, and if the
clock at A is transported to B along the connecting line with
velocity v, then upon arrival of this clock at B the two clocks
will no longer be running synchronously; instead, the clock
that has been transported from A to B will lag 12 tv2 /V 2 sec
(up to quantities of the fourth and higher orders) behind
the clock that has been in B from the outset, where t is the
time needed by the clock to travel from A to B
We see at once that this result holds even when the clock
moves from A to B along any arbitrary polygonal line, and
even when the points A and B coincide.5
If we assume that the result proved for a polygonal line
holds also for a continuously curved line, then we arrive
at the following result: If there are two synchronously running clocks at A, and one of them is moved along a closed
curve with constant velocity until it has returned to A, which
takes, say, t sec, then, on its arrival at A, this clock will lag
1
2
2 tv/V  sec behind the clock that has not been moved.
From this we conclude that a balance-wheel clock6 located
at the Earth’s equator must, under otherwise identical conditions, run more slowly by a very small amount than an
absolutely identical clock located at one of the Earth’s poles.
139

PAPER 3

5. The Addition Theorem for Velocities
In the system k moving with velocity v along the X-axis
of the system K, let a point move in accordance with the
equations
ξ = wξ τ
η = wη τ
ζ = 0

where wξ and wη denote constants.
We seek the motion of the point relative to the system K.
Introducing the quantities x, y, z, t into the equations of motion of the point by means of the transformation equations
derived in section 3, we obtain
wξ + v
vwξ t
1+ 2
V
 2
1− v
V
wη t
vwξ
1+ 2
V

x=

y=

z = 0

Thus, according to our theory, the vector addition for velocities holds only to first approximation. Let
U2 =



dx
dt

2

+



dy
dt

2

w2 = w2ξ + w2η

and
α = arctan
140

wy 7

wx



ELECTRODYNAMICS OF MOVING BODIES

α is then to be considered as the angle between the velocities v and w. After a simple calculation we obtain

U =

2

v2 + w2 + 2vw cos α − vw sin α
V

vw
cos
α
1+
V2

It is worth noting that v and w enter into the expression for
the resultant velocity in a symmetrical manner. If w also has
the direction of the X-axis -axis), we get
U =

v+w

1 + vw2
V

It follows from this equation that the composition of two
velocities that are smaller than V always results in a velocity
that is smaller than V . For if we set v = V − κ, and w =
V − λ, where κ and λ are positive and smaller than V , then
U =V

2V − κ − λ
< V
2V − κ − λ + κλ
V

It also follows that the velocity of light V cannot be
changed by compounding it with a “subluminal velocity.”
For this case we get
U =

V +w
= V
1+ w
V

In the case where v and w have the same direction, the formula for U could also have been obtained by compounding
two transformations according to section 3. If in addition to
the systems K and k, occurring in section 3, we introduce
a third coordinate system k′ , which moves parallel to k and
whose origin moves with velocity w along the -axis, we
obtain equations between the quantities x, y, z, t and the
141

PAPER 3

corresponding quantities of k′ that differ from those found
in section 3 only insofar as “v" is replaced by the quantity
v+w

1 + vw2
V

from this we see that such parallel transformations form a
group—as indeed they must.
We have now derived the required laws of the kinematics
corresponding to our two principles, and proceed to their
application to electrodynamics.
B. Electrodynamic Part
6. Transformation of the Maxwell-Hertz Equations
for Empty Space. On the Nature of the Electromotive
Forces Arising Due to Motion in a Magnetic Field
Let the Maxwell-Hertz equations for empty space be valid
for the rest system K, so that we have
1 ∂X = ∂N − ∂M 
V ∂t
∂y
∂z

1 ∂L = ∂Y − ∂Z 
V ∂t
∂z
∂y

1 ∂Y = ∂L − ∂N 
V ∂t
∂z
∂x

1 ∂M = ∂Z − ∂X 
V ∂t
∂x
∂z

1 ∂Z = ∂M − ∂L 
V ∂t
∂x
∂y

1 ∂N = ∂X − ∂Y 
V ∂t
∂y
∂x

where X Y  Z denotes the electric force vector and
L M N  the magnetic force vector.
If we apply the transformations derived in section 3 to
these equations, in order to relate the electromagnetic processes to the coordinate system moving with velocity v
introduced there, we obtain the following equations:
142

ELECTRODYNAMICS OF MOVING BODIES





∂β N − v Y
∂β M + v Z
1 ∂X =
V
V
−

V ∂τ
∂η
∂ζ




∂β Y − v N
∂β N − v Y
1
V
V
= ∂L −

V
∂τ
∂ζ
∂ξ




∂β Z + v M
∂β M + v Z
1
V
V
=
− ∂L 
V
∂τ
∂ξ
∂η




∂β Y − v N
∂β Z + v M
1 ∂L =
V
V
−

V ∂τ
∂ζ
∂η




∂β M + v Z
∂β Z + v M
1
V
V
=
− ∂X 
V
∂τ
∂ξ
∂ζ




∂β N − v Y
∂β Y − v N
1
V
V
= ∂X −

V
∂τ
∂η
∂ξ

where

β=

1
 2 
1− v
V

The relativity principle requires that the Maxwell-Hertz
equations for empty space also be valid in the system k if
they are valid in the system K, i.e, that the electric and
magnetic force vectors—X′  Y ′  Z′  and L′  M ′  N ′ —of the
moving system k, which are defined in this system by their
ponderomotive effects on electric and magnetic charges,
respectively, satisfy the equations
1 ∂X′ = ∂N ′ − ∂M ′ 
V ∂τ
∂η
∂ζ

1 ∂L′ = ∂Y ′ − ∂Z′ 
V ∂τ
∂ζ
∂η

1 ∂Y ′ = ∂L′ − ∂N ′ 
V ∂τ
∂ζ
∂ξ

1 ∂M ′ = ∂Z′ − ∂X′ 
V ∂τ
∂ξ
∂ζ
143

PAPER 3

1 ∂Z′ = ∂M ′ − ∂L′ 
V ∂τ
∂ξ
∂η

1 ∂N ′ = ∂X′ − ∂Y ′ 
V ∂τ
∂η
∂ξ

Obviously, the two systems of equations found for the system k must express exactly the same thing, since both systems
of equations are equivalent to the Maxwell-Hertz equations
for the system K. Further, since the equations for the two systems are in agreement apart from the symbols representing
the vectors, it follows that the functions occurring in the systems of equations at corresponding places must agree up to
a factor ψv, common to all functions of one of the systems
of equations and independent of ξ, η, ζ, and τ, but possibly
depending on v. Thus we have the relations:
X′ = ψvX


Y ′ = ψvβ Y − v N 
V


Z′ = ψvβ Z + v M 
V

L′ = ψvL


M ′ = ψvβ M + v Z 
V


N ′ = ψvβ N − v Y 
V

If we now invert this system of equations, first by solving
the equations just obtained, and second by applying to the
equations the inverse transformation (from k to K), which is
characterized by the velocity −v, we get, taking into account
that both systems of equations so obtained must be identical,
ϕv · ϕ−v = 1

Further, it follows for reasons of symmetry4 that
ϕv = ϕ−v
4

If, e.g., X = Y = Z = L = M = 0 and N = 0, then it is clear for reasons of symmetry that if v changes its sign without changing its numerical
value, then Y ′ must also change its sign without changing its numerical
value.
144

ELECTRODYNAMICS OF MOVING BODIES

thus
ϕv = 1

and our equations take the form
X′ = X


Y′ = β Y − v N 
V


Z′ = β Z + v M 
V

L′ = L


M′ = β M + v Z 
V


N′ = β N − v Y 
V

By way of interpreting these equations, we note the following
remarks: Imagine a pointlike electric charge, whose magnitude measured in the rest system is “unit,” i.e., which, when
at rest in the rest system exerts a force of 1 dyne on an equal
charge at a distance of 1 cm. According to the principle of
relativity this electric charge is also of “unit” magnitude if
measured in the moving system. If this electric charge is at
rest relative to the rest system, then by definition the vector X Y  Z equals the force acting on it. If, on the other
hand, this acting charge is at rest relative to the moving system (at least at the relevant instant), then the force acting
on it measured in the moving system is equal to the vector
X′  Y ′  Z′ . Hence, the first three of the above equations can
be expressed in words in the following two ways:
1. If a unit point electric charge moves in an electromagnetic
field, there acts upon it, in addition to the electric force,
an “electromotive force” that, neglecting terms multiplied by
the second and higher powers of v/V , is equal to the vector
product of the velocity of the charge and the magnetic force,
divided by the velocity of light. (Old mode of expression.)
2. If a unit point electric charge moves in an electromagnetic
field, the force acting on it equals the electric force at the
145

PAPER 3

location of the unit charge that is obtained by transforming
the field to a coordinate system at rest relative to the unit
charge. (New mode of expression.)

Analogous remarks hold for “magnetomotive forces.”8
We can see that in the theory developed here, the electromotive force only plays the role of an auxiliary concept,
which owes its introduction to the circumstance that the
electric and magnetic forces do not have an existence independent of the state of motion of the coordinate system.
It is further clear that the asymmetry in the treatment
of currents produced by the relative motion of a magnet
and a conductor, mentioned in the introduction, disappears.
Moreover, questions about the “site” of electrodynamic electromotive forces (unipolar machines) become pointless.
7. Theory of Doppler’s Principle and of Aberration
In the system K and very far from the coordinate origin, let
there be a source of electrodynamic waves that, in a part of
space containing the coordinate origin, are represented with
sufficient accuracy by the equations
X = X0 sin 

L = L0 sin 

Y = Y0 sin 

M = M0 sin 

Z = Z0 sin 

N = N0 sin 



ax + by + cz

=ω t−
V

Here X0  Y0  Z0  and L0  M0  N0  are the vectors determining the amplitude of the wave train, and a b c are the
direction cosines of the norm to the waves.
We want to know the character of these waves when investigated by an observer at rest in the moving system k.
146

ELECTRODYNAMICS OF MOVING BODIES

Applying the transformation equations for electric and magnetic forces found in section 6 and those for coordinates and
time found in section 3, we immediately obtain:
X′ = X0 sin ′ 

L′ = L0 sin ′ 





M ′ = β M0 + v Z0 sin ′ 
Y ′ = β Y0 − v N0 sin ′ 
V
V




N ′ = β N0 − v Y0 sin ′ 
Z′ = β Z0 + v M0 sin ′ 
V
V


a′ ξ + b′ η + c′ ζ

′ = ω ′ τ −
V

where we have put


ω′ = ωβ 1 + a v 
V
a− v
V 
′
a =
1−av
V
 b

β 1−av
V
c

c′ = 
β 1−av
V

b′ =

From the equation for ω′ it follows that if an observer
moves with velocity v relative to an infinitely distant source
of light of frequency ν, in such a way that the connecting line
“light source–observer” forms an angle ϕ with the observer’s
velocity, where this velocity is relative to a coordinate system
at rest relative to the light source, then ν ′ , the frequency of
147

PAPER 3

the light perceived by the observer, is given by the equation
1 − cos ϕ v
V
ν =ν
 2 
1− v
V
′

This is Doppler’s principle for arbitrary velocities. For ϕ = 0
the equation takes the simple form

1 − v

V 
′
ν = ν
1+ v
V

We see that, contrary to the usual conception, when v =
−∞, then ν = ∞9
If ϕ′ denotes the angle between the wave normal (the direction of the ray) in the moving system and the connecting
line “light source–observer,”10 the equation for α′11 takes
the form
v
cos ϕ′ =

cos ϕ −
V 
1 − v cos ϕ
V

This equation expresses the law of aberration in its most
general form. If ϕ = π/2, the equation takes the simple
form
cos ϕ′ = − v 
V

We still need to find the amplitude of the waves as it
appears in the moving system. If A and A′ denote the amplitude of electric or magnetic force in the rest system and
moving system respectively, we get
A′2 = A2



1 − v cos ϕ
V
 2
1− v
V
148

2



ELECTRODYNAMICS OF MOVING BODIES

which for ϕ = 0 takes the simpler form:
1− v
V 
A =A
1+ v
V
′2

2

It follows from these results that to an observer approaching a light source with velocity V , this source would have to
appear infinitely intense.

8. Transformation of the Energy of Light Rays.
Theory of Radiation Pressure
Exerted on Perfect Mirrors
Since A2 /8π equals the energy of light per unit volume,
according to the principle of relativity we have to consider
A′2 /8π as the light energy in the moving system. Hence
A′2 /A2 would be the ratio of the energy of a given light
complex “measured in motion” and “measured at rest” if
the volume of a light complex were the same measured in
K and in k. However, this is not the case. If a b c are
the direction cosines of the wave normal of the light in
the rest system, then the surface elements of the spherical
surface
x − Vat2 + y − Vbt2 + z − Vct2 = R2

moving with the velocity of light are not traversed by any
energy; we may therefore say that this surface permanently
encloses the same light complex. We investigate the quantity of energy enclosed by this surface considered from the
system k, i.e., the energy of the light complex relative to
the system k
149

PAPER 3

Considered in the moving system, the spherical surface is
an ellipsoidal surface whose equation at time τ = 0 is


βξ − aβ v ξ
V

2
2 

= R2 
+ η − bβ v ξ + ζ − cβ v
V
Vξ

2

If S denotes the volume of the sphere and S′ that of the
ellipsoid, then a simple calculation shows that
 2
v
′
V
S =

S
1 − v cos ϕ
V
1−

If we call the energy of the light enclosed by this surface E
when measured in the rest system and E′ when measured
in the moving system, we obtain
A′2 S′
1 − v cos ϕ
E = 8π =
V
 2 
E
A2 S
1− v
8π
V
′

which, for ϕ = 0, simplifies to

1 − v
E =
V 

E
1+ v
V
′

It is noteworthy that the energy and the frequency of
a light complex vary with the observer’s state of motion
according to the same law.
Let the coordinate plane ξ = 0 be a completely reflecting
surface, from which the plane waves considered in section
7 are reflected. We investigate the pressure of light exerted
on the reflecting surface, and the direction, frequency, and
intensity of the light after reflection.
150

ELECTRODYNAMICS OF MOVING BODIES

Let the incident light be defined by the quantities A,
cos ϕ, and ν (relative to system K. Considered from k,
the corresponding quantities are
1 − v cos ϕ
V
A =A
 2 
1− v
V
′

cos ϕ − v
V 
cos ϕ =
1 − v cos ϕ
V
1 − v cos ϕ
V
′
ν =ν
 2 
1− v
V
′

Referring the process to the system k, we get for the reflected light
A′′ = A′ 
cos ϕ′′ = − cos ϕ′ 
ν ′′ = ν′ 

Finally, by transforming back to the rest system K, we get
for the reflected light
 2
1 − 2 v cos ϕ + v
1 + v cos ϕ′′
V
V
V 
A′′′ = A′′
 2
 2 = A
v
1−
1− v
V
V


 2
1+ v
cos ϕ − 2 v
cos ϕ′′ + v
V
V
V
′′′
=−
cos ϕ =
 2 
1 + v cos ϕ′′
v
v
1 − 2 cos ϕ +
V
V
V
151

PAPER 3

 2
1 − 2 v cos ϕ + v
1 + v cos ϕ′′
V
V
V 12
ν′′′ = ν′′
2

 2 = ν
v
1−
1− v
V
V

The energy (measured in the rest system) that strikes
a unit surface of the mirror per unit time is obviously
A2 /8πV cos ϕ − v. The energy leaving a unit surface of
the mirror per unit time is A′′′2 /8π−V cos ϕ′′′ + v. According to the principle of energy conservation, the difference
of these two expressions is the work done by light pressure
per unit time. Equating this work to P · v, where P is the
pressure of light, we obtain

v 2
cos
ϕ
−
2
V
P =2 A
 2 
8π
v
1−
V


To first approximation, in agreement with experiment and
with other theories, we get
2

P = 2 A cos2 ϕ
8π

All problems in the optics of moving bodies can be solved
by the method employed here. The essential point is that
the electric and magnetic fields of light that is influenced by
a moving body are transformed to a coordinate system that
is at rest relative to that body. By this means, all problems
in the optics of moving bodies are reduced to a series of
problems in the optics of bodies at rest.
152

ELECTRODYNAMICS OF MOVING BODIES

9. Transformation of the Maxwell-Hertz
Equations When Convection Currents Are
Taken into Account
We start from the equations


1 u ρ + ∂X = ∂N − ∂M 
V x
∂t
∂y
∂z


1 u ρ + ∂Y = ∂L − ∂N 
V y
∂t
∂z
∂x


1 u ρ + ∂Z = ∂M − ∂L 
V z
∂t
∂x
∂y

where

1 ∂L = ∂Y − ∂Z 
V ∂t
∂z
∂y
1 ∂M = ∂Z − ∂X 
V ∂t
∂x
∂z
1 ∂N = ∂X − ∂Y 
V ∂t
∂y
∂x

ρ = ∂X + ∂Y + ∂Z
∂x
∂y
∂z

denotes 4π times the charge density, and ux  uy  uz  the
velocity vector of the charge. If the electric charges are conceived as permanently bound to small, rigid bodies (ions,
electrons), then these equations constitute the electromagnetic foundation of Lorentz’s electrodynamics and optics of
moving bodies.
If, using the transformation equations presented in sections 3 and 6, we transform these equations, assumed to be
valid in the system K, to the system k, we get the equations


1 u ρ′ + ∂X′ = ∂N ′ − ∂M ′ 
V ξ
∂τ
∂η
∂ζ


1 u ρ′ + ∂Y ′ = ∂L′ − ∂N ′ 
V η
∂τ
∂ζ
∂ξ


1 u ρ′ + ∂Z′ = ∂M ′ − ∂L′ 
V ζ
∂τ
∂ξ
∂η
153

1 ∂L′ = ∂Y ′ − ∂Z′ 
V ∂τ
∂ζ
∂η
1 ∂M ′ = ∂Z′ − ∂X′ 
V ∂τ
∂ξ
∂ζ
1 ∂N ′ = ∂X′ − ∂Y ′ 
V ∂τ
∂η
∂ξ

PAPER 3

where
ux − v
u v = uξ 
1 − x2
V
uy

u v  = uη 
β 1 − x2
V
u
 z u v  = uζ 
β 1 − x2
V

and



′
′
′
vux
∂Y
∂Z
∂X
+
+
= β 1 − 2 ρ
ρ =
∂ξ
∂η
∂ζ
V
′

Since—as follows from the velocity addition theorem (sec.
5)—the vector uξ  uη  uζ  is actually the velocity of the electric charges measured in the system k, we have thus shown
that, on the basis of our kinematic principles, the electrodynamic foundation of Lorentz’s theory of the electrodynamics
of moving bodies agrees with the principle of relativity.
Let me also briefly add that the following important proposition can easily be deduced from the equations we have
derived: If an electrically charged body moves arbitrarily in
space without altering its charge when observed from a coordinate system moving with the body, then its charge also
remains constant when observed from the “rest” system K
10. Dynamics of the (Slowly Accelerated) Electron
In an electromagnetic field let there move an electrically
charged particle with charge ǫ (called an “electron” in what
follows); we assume only the following about its law of
motion:
154

ELECTRODYNAMICS OF MOVING BODIES

If the electron is at rest at a particular moment, its motion
during the next instant of time will occur according to the
equations
2

µ d x2 = ǫX
dt
µ

d2 y
= ǫY 
dt 2
2

µ d z2 = ǫZ
dt

where x y z denote the coordinates of the electron and µ
its mass as long as the electron moves slowly.
Further, let the electron’s velocity at a certain moment be
v. We investigate the law of motion of the electron during
the immediately succeeding instant of time.
Without loss of generality, we may and shall assume that
the electron is at the coordinate origin and moves with velocity v along the X-axis of the system K at the moment with
which we are concerned. It is then obvious that at the given
moment t = 0, the electron is at rest relative to a coordinate system k moving with constant velocity v parallel to the
X-axis.
From the above assumption combined with the relativity
principle, it is clear that, considered from the system k, the
electron will move during the immediately ensuing period
of time (for small values of t according to the equations
µ

d2 ξ
= ǫX′ 
dτ 2

µ

d2 η
= ǫY ′ 
dτ 2

µ

d2 ζ
= ǫZ′ 
dτ 2
155

PAPER 3

where the symbols ξ, η, ζ, τ, X′ , Y ′ , Z′ all refer to the
system k. If we also stipulate that, for t = x = y = z = 0,
τ = ξ = η = ζ = 0 shall also hold, then the transformation
equations of sections 3 and 6 are applicable, so that we get


τ = β t − v2 x 
V
X′ = x


Y′ = β Y − v N 
V


Z′ = β Z + v M 
V

ξ = βx − vt
η = y
ζ = z

With the help of these equations we transform the above
equations of motion from the system k to the system K,
obtaining
d2 x = ǫ 1 X
dt 2
µ β3


d2 y
ǫ 1 Y − vN 
=
dt 2
µβ
V


d2 z = ǫ 1 Z + v M 
dt 2
µβ
V

(A)

Following the usual approach, we now investigate the
“longitudinal” and “transverse” mass of the moving electron.
We write equations (A) in the form
2

µβ3 d x2 = ǫX = ǫX′ 
dt


2
d y
µβ2 2 = ǫβ Y − v N = ǫY ′ 
dt
V


2
µβ2 d z2 = ǫβ Z + v M = ǫZ′ 
dt
V
156

ELECTRODYNAMICS OF MOVING BODIES

and note first that ǫX′ , ǫY ′ , ǫZ′ are the components of the
ponderomotive force acting on the electron, as considered in
a moving system that, at this instant, is moving with the same
velocity as the electron. (This force could be measured, for
example, by a spring balance at rest in the latter system.) If
we simply call13 this force “the force acting on the electron,”
and preserve the equation
Mass × Acceleration = Force,

stipulating, in addition, that accelerations be measured in
the rest system K, then the above equations lead to the
definition:
µ
 2 3 
1− v
V
µ
Transverse mass =
 2 
1− v
V

Longitudinal mass = 

Of course, with a different definition of force and acceleration we would obtain different values for these masses;
this shows that we must proceed very cautiously when comparing various theories of electron motion.
It should be noted that these results about mass are also
valid for ponderable material points, because a ponderable
material point can be made into an electron (in our sense
of the word) by adding to it an arbitrarily small electric
charge.
We now determine the kinetic energy of an electron. If
an electron starts from the origin of the system K with an
initial velocity 0 and continues to move along the X-axis
under the influence of an electrostatic force X, it is clear that
the energy it takes from the electrostatic field has the value
157

PAPER 3



ǫXdx. Since the electron is supposed to accelerate slowly,
and consequently cannot emit any energy in the form of
radiation, the energy taken from the electrostatic field must
be equated to the kinetic energy W of the electron. Bearing
in mind that the first of equations (A) holds throughout the
entire process of motion, we obtain
W =



ǫX dx =

v
0


β3 v dv = µV 2 


1

−
1
 2
v
 1−

V

Thus, W becomes infinitely large when v = V . As is the
case for our previous results, superluminal velocities are not
possible.
By virtue of the argument presented above, this expression for kinetic energy must also be valid for ponderable
masses.
Let us now enumerate the properties of the electron’s
motion resulting from the system of equations (A) that are
accessible to experiment.
1. From the second equation of the system (A) it follows
that an electric force Y and a magnetic force N have an
equally strong deflective effect on an electron moving with
velocity v if Y = Nv/V . Thus we see that, using our theory, it
is possible to determine the velocity of the electron from the
ratio of the magnetic deflection Am to the electric deflection
Ae for arbitrary velocities, by applying the law
Am
= v
V
Ae

This relation can be tested experimentally since the velocity of the electron can also be measured directly, e.g., using
rapidly oscillating electric and magnetic fields.
158

ELECTRODYNAMICS OF MOVING BODIES

2. From the derivation of the kinetic energy of an electron it follows that the potential difference traversed by the
electron and the velocity v that the electron acquires must
be related by the equation
P =



X dx =



µ 2
1

−
1
V
 2
ǫ
v

 1−
V

3. We calculate the radius of curvature R of the path of
the electron if a magnetic force N , acting perpendicularly to
its velocity, is present (as the only deflecting force). From
the second of equations (A) we obtain:
−

2
d2 y
= v = ǫ vN ·
dt 2
R
µV

1−

 2
v
V

or
R=V

2µ

ǫ

v
1
V
 2 · N 
1− v
V

These three relations are a complete expression of the
laws by which, according to the theory presented here, the
electron must move.
In conclusion, let me note that my friend and colleague
M. Besso steadfastly stood by me in my work on the problem
discussed here, and that I am indebted to him for several
valuable suggestions.
(Annalen der Physik 17 [1905]: 891–921)

editorial notes
1
In the 1913 reprint, a note was added after “be valid”: “What is
meant is, ‘be valid in the first approximation.’ ” If Einstein did not write

159

PAPER 3

the additional notes to this paper, the contents of some of the notes suggest that he was consulted.
2
Einstein introduces the designations , H, Z for the coordinates for
the x′ , y ′ , x′ axes of the moving system.
3
In the 1913 reprint, the following note is appended to the end of this
line: “The Lorentz transformation equations are more simply derivable
directly from the condition that, as a consequence of these equations, the
relation ξ2 +η2 +ζ 2 = V 2 τ 2 = 0 shall have the other x2 +y 2 +z2 −V 2 t 2 =
0 as a consequence.”
4
See previous note.
5
This result later became known as “the clock paradox.” In 1911,
Langevin seems to have first introduced human travelers, leading to the
alternate name, “the twin paradox.”
6
In the 1913 reprint, the following note is appended to the word “Unruhuhr”: “In contrast to the ‘pendulum clock,’ which—from the physical
standpoint—is a system, to which the earth belongs; this had to be excluded.”
w
7
This fraction should be wηξ .
8
The term “motional magnetic force” was introduced by Heaviside.
Einstein later defined the “magnetomotive force” as the force acting on
a unit of magnetic charge moving through an electric field. To the order of approximation used in the discussion of “electromotive force,”
the magnetomotive force is given by −1/V v E, where E = L M N ,
v = v 0 0, and the bracket is a vector product.
9
Corrected by Einstein in a reprint copy to “for v = −V  v = −∞.”
10
In ibid., “the connecting line ‘light source–observer’ ” was canceled
and interlineated with “direction of motion.”
11
α should be ϕ.
12
In a reprint copy, the denominator in the final term is corrected to
“1 − v/V 2 .”
13
In the 1913 reprint, the following note is appended to “call”: “The
definition of force given here is not advantageous as was first noted by
M. Planck. It is instead appropriate to define force in such a way that the
laws of momentum and energy conservation take the simplest form.”

160

PA P E R 4
✦

Does the Inertia of a Body
Depend on Its Energy Content?

The results of an electrodynamic investigation recently
published by me in this journal1 lead to a very interesting
conclusion, which will be derived here.
I based that investigation on the Maxwell-Hertz equations for empty space, together with Maxwell’s expression for
the electromagnetic energy of space, and also the following
principle:
The laws according to which the states of physical systems
change are independent of which one of the two coordinate
systems (assumed to be in uniform parallel-translational motion relative to each other) is used to describe these changes
(the principle of relativity).
Based on this foundation,2 I derived the following result,
among others (loc. cit., sec. 8).

1

A. Einstein, Ann. d. Phys. 17 (1905): 891. [See paper 3].
The principle of the constancy of the velocity of light used there is of
course contained in Maxwell’s equations.
2

161

PAPER 4

Let a system of plane light waves have the energy l relative to the coordinate system x y z; let the ray direction
(the wave-normal) make the angle ϕ with the x-axis of the
system. If we introduce a new coordinate system ξ η ζ,
which is in uniform parallel translation with respect to the
system x y z, and the origin of which moves along the
x-axis with velocity v, then this quantity of light—measured
in the system ξ η ζ—has the energy
l∗ = l

1 − v cos ϕ
V

 2
v
1−
V

where V denotes the velocity of light. We shall make use of
this result in what follows.
Let there be a body at rest in the system x y z whose
energy, relative to the system x y z, is E0 . Let the energy
of the body be H0  relative to the system ξ η ζ, moving
with velocity v as above.
Let this body emit plane light waves of energy L/2 (measured relative to x y z) in a direction forming an angle
ϕ with the x-axis, and at the same time an equal amount
of light in the opposite direction. The body remains at rest
with respect to system x y z during this process. This process must satisfy the principle of conservation of energy, and
must be true (according to the principle of relativity) with
respect to both coordinate systems. If E1 and H1 denote the
energy of the body after emission of the light, measured relative to the system x y z and the ξ η ζ, respectively,
we obtain, using the relation indicated above,


E0 = E1 + L + L 
2
2
162

INERTIA OF A BODY ENERGY CONTENT




v cos ϕ
v cos ϕ
1
−
1
+
L

L
V
V

H0 = H1 + 
2
 2 + 2
 2 
v
v
1−
1−
V
V
= H1 +

L
 2 
1− v
V

By subtraction, we obtain from these equations

H0 − E0  − H1 − E1  = L


1

−
1
 2
 1− v

V

Both differences of the form H − E occurring in this expression have simple physical meanings. H and E are the
energy values of the same body, related to two coordinate
systems in relative motion, the body being at rest in one of
the systems (system x y z). Hence it is clear that the difference H − E can differ from the body’s kinetic energy K
with respect to the other system (system ξ η ζ) only by
an additive constant C, which depends on the choice of the
arbitrary additive constants in the energies H and E. We can
therefore set
H0 − E0 = K0 + C

H1 − E1 = K1 + C

since C does not change during the emission of light. So we
get


1

 2 − 1 
v

 1−
V

K0 − K1 = L

The kinetic energy of the body with respect to ξ η ζ decreases as a result of emission of the light by an amount
163

PAPER 4

that is independent of the properties of the body. Furthermore, the difference K0 − K1 depends on the velocity in the
same way as does the kinetic energy of an electron (loc. cit.,
sec. 10).
Neglecting magnitudes of the fourth and higher order, we
can get1
2

K0 − K1 = L2 v 
V 2

From this equation one immediately concludes:
If a body emits the energy L in the form of radiation, its
mass decreases by L/V 2 . Here it is obviously inessential that
the energy taken from the body turns into radiant energy,
so we are led to the more general conclusion:
The mass of a body is a measure of its energy content;
if the energy changes by L, the mass changes in the same
sense by L/9 · 1020 if the energy is measured in ergs and the
mass in grams.
It is not excluded that it will prove possible to test this
theory using bodies whose energy content is variable to a
high degree (e.g., radium salts).
If the theory agrees with the facts, then radiation carries
inertia between emitting and absorbing bodies.
(Annalen der Physik 18 [1905]: 639–641)

editorial notes
1

Einstein used the Newtonian limit of the body’s kinetic energy in
order to evaluate change in its rest mass.

164

Part Four
✦
Einstein’s Early Work on the
Quantum Hypothesis

Image Not Available

Einstein in Bern, ca. 1905. (Lotte Jacobi
Archives, University of New Hampshire)

In describing his 1905 papers, Einstein characterized only
paper 5 as revolutionary (see the Introduction, p. 5). It is
still regarded as revolutionary for challenging the unlimited validity of Maxwell’s theory of light and suggesting the
existence of light quanta. Paper 5 shows that, at a sufficiently high frequency, the entropy of equilibrium thermal
(or “black-body”) radiation behaves as if the radiation consisted of a gas of independent “quanta of light energy” (or
simply “light quanta”), each with energy proportional to the
frequency of the corresponding wave. Einstein showed how
to explain several otherwise puzzling phenomena by assuming that the interaction of light with matter consists of the
emission or absorption of such light quanta.
Einstein became familiar with black-body radiation well
before 1905. Mach’s Wärmelehre, which Einstein read in
1897 or shortly thereafter, contains two chapters on thermal radiation, culminating in a discussion of Gustav Robert
Kirchhoff’s work. Kirchhoff showed that the energy emission spectrum of a perfectly black body (defined as one that
absorbs all incident radiation) at a given temperature is a
universal function of the temperature of the body and wavelength of the radiation. He inferred that equilibrium thermal
radiation in a cavity with walls maintained at a certain temperature behaves like radiation emitted by a black body at
the same temperature.
Heinrich Friedrich Weber, Einstein’s physics professor at
the Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule (ETH), was one
of those who attempted to determine the universal blackbody radiation function. He made measurements of the energy spectrum and proposed an empirical formula for the
167

PART FOUR

distribution function. He showed that, as a consequence of
his formula, λm = constant/T (where λm is the wavelength
with the maximum intensity of the distribution), thus anticipating Wilhelm Wien’s formulation of the displacement
law for black-body radiation. Weber described his work in
a course at the ETH given during the winter semester of
1898–1899, which Einstein took.
Einstein soon started to think seriously about the problem
of radiation. By the spring of 1901, he was closely following
Planck’s work on black-body radiation. Originally, Planck had
hoped to explain the irreversibility of physical processes by
studying electromagnetic radiation; ultimately, he came to
recognize that this could not be done without introducing
statistical elements into the argument. In a series of papers
between 1897 and 1900, Planck utilized Maxwell’s electrodynamics to develop a theory of thermal radiation in interaction with one or more identical, charged harmonic oscillators within a cavity. He was only able to account for the
radiation’s irreversible approach to thermal equilibrium by
employing methods analogous to those that Ludwig Boltzmann had used in kinetic theory. Planck introduced the notion of “natural” (that is, maximally disordered) radiation,
which he defined by analogy with Boltzmann’s definition of
molecular chaos. Using Maxwell’s theory, Planck derived a
relation between the average energy Ē of a charged oscillator of frequency ν in equilibrium with thermal radiation
and the energy density per unit frequency interval ρν of the
radiation at the same frequency:
Ēν =

c3 ρ 
8πν2 ν

where c is the speed of light.
168

(1)

EARLY WORK ON QUANTUM HYPOTHESIS

Planck calculated the average energy of an oscillator by
making assumptions about the entropy of the oscillators that
enabled him to derive Wien’s law for the energy density
of the black-body spectrum, which originally seemed well
supported by the experimental evidence. But by the turn of
the century new observations showed systematic deviations
from Wien’s law for large values of λT .
Planck presented a new energy density distribution formula that agreed closely with observations over the entire
spectrum:1
3
1
ρν = 8πhν

3
c
ehν/kT − 1

(2)

In this expression, now known as Planck’s law or Planck’s
formula, k = R/N is Boltzmann’s constant, where R is the
gas constant, N is Avogadro’s (or Loschmidt’s) number, and
h is a new constant (later called Planck’s constant). To derive this formula, Planck calculated the entropy of the oscillators, using what Einstein later called “the Boltzmann
principle”: S = k ln W  where S is the entropy of a macroscopic state of the system, the probability of which is W .
Following Boltzmann, Planck took the probability of a state
to be proportional to the number of “complexions,” or possible microconfigurations of the system corresponding to that
state. He calculated this number by dividing the total energy of the state into a finite number of elements of equal
magnitude, and counting the number of possible ways of
distributing these energy elements among the individual oscillators. If the size of the energy elements is set equal to
hν, where ν is the frequency of an oscillator, an expression
for the entropy of an oscillator results that leads to eq. (2).
Although Einstein expressed private misgivings about
Planck’s approach in 1901, he did not mention Planck or
169

PART FOUR

black-body radiation in his papers until 1904. A study of the
foundations of statistical physics, which he undertook between 1902 and 1904, provided Einstein with the tools he
needed to analyze Planck’s derivation and explore its consequences. At least three elements of Einstein’s “general
molecular theory of heat” were central to his subsequent
work on the quantum hypothesis: (1) the introduction of
the canonical ensemble; (2) the interpretation of probability
as it occurs in Boltzmann’s principle; and (3) the study of
energy fluctuations in thermal equilibrium.
1. In an analysis of the canonical ensemble, Einstein
proved that the equipartition theorem (see the Introduction, p. 16) holds for any system in thermal equilibrium.
In paper 5 he showed that, when applied to an ensemble of charged harmonic oscillators in equilibrium with
thermal radiation, the equipartition theorem leads, via eq.
(1), to a black-body distribution law now known as the
Rayleigh-Jeans law:
2

kT 
ρν = 8πν
c3

(3)

Despite its rigorous foundation in classical physics, eq. (3)
only agrees with the observed energy distribution for small
values of ν/T ; indeed, as Einstein noted, it implies an infinite total radiant energy.
2. In 1906, Einstein posed a question that preoccupied
him and others at the time: “How is it that Planck did not
arrive at the same formula [eq. (3)], but at the expression . . .
[eq. (2)]?” One answer lies in Planck’s definition of W in
Boltzmann’s principle, which, as Einstein repeatedly noted,
differs fundamentally from his own definition of probabilities
as time averages. As noted above, Planck interpreted W as
170

EARLY WORK ON QUANTUM HYPOTHESIS

proportional to the number of complexions of a state of the
system. As Einstein pointed out in 1909, such a definition
of W is equivalent to its definition as the average, over a
long period of time, of the fraction of time that the system
spends in this state only if all complexions corresponding
to a given total energy are equally probable. However, if
this is assumed to hold for an ensemble of oscillators in
thermal equilibrium with radiation, the Rayleigh-Jeans law
results. Hence, the validity of Planck’s law implies that all
complexions cannot be equally probable. Einstein showed
that, if the energies available to a canonical ensemble of
oscillators are arbitrarily restricted to multiples of the energy
element hν, then all possible complexions are not equally
probable, and Planck’s law results.
3. A third element of Einstein’s work on statistical physics
that is central to his work on the quantum hypothesis is his
method for calculating mean-square fluctuations in the state
variables of a system in thermal equilibrium. He employed
the canonical ensemble to calculate such fluctuations in the
energy of mechanical systems, then boldly applied the result
to a nonmechanical system—black-body radiation, deducing
a relation that agrees with Wien’s displacement law discussed
above. This agreement suggests the applicability of statistical
concepts to radiation, and may have suggested to Einstein
the possibility that radiation could be treated as a system
with a finite number of degrees of freedom, a possibility he
raised at the outset of paper 5.
In connection with his work on Brownian motion in 1905–
1906, Einstein developed additional methods for calculating fluctuations, methods he later applied to the analysis of
black-body radiation. In particular, he developed a method
based on an inversion of Boltzmann’s principle that can be
171

PART FOUR

used even in the absence of a microscopic model of the
system. If the entropy of a system is given as a function
of its macroscopic state variables, then Boltzmann’s principle, in the form W = exp S/k , can be used to calculate
the probability of a state, and hence of fluctuations of any
state variable. In 1909, Einstein used this method to calculate the fluctuations in the energy of black-body radiation
in a given region of space. The stochastic method, used in
the same paper to calculate fluctuations in the pressure of
radiation, is based on his work on Brownian motion. Pressure fluctuations maintain the Brownian motion of a small
mirror moving through the radiation field, in the face of the
retarding force exerted on the mirror by the average radiation pressure. The results of these fluctuation calculations
are discussed below.
Einstein’s work on relativity also contributed to the development of his views on the nature of light. By eliminating
the concept of the ether and showing that a flux of radiant energy transfers inertial mass, the theory of relativity
demonstrated that light no longer need be treated as a disturbance in a hypothetical medium, but could be regarded
as composed of independent structures, to which mass must
be attributed.
Among Einstein’s papers on the quantum hypothesis, paper
5 is unique in arguing for the notion of light quanta without using either the formal apparatus of his statistical papers
or Planck’s law. As noted above, Einstein demonstrated that
only the Rayleigh-Jeans law, the limiting form of Planck’s
formula for small values of ν/T  is consistent with classical statistical mechanics and Maxwell’s electrodynamics. At
the other extreme, at which Wien’s distribution law holds,
172

EARLY WORK ON QUANTUM HYPOTHESIS

Einstein argues that “theoretical principles we have been
using . . . fail completely.” As he explained later that year,
this failure “seems to me to have its basis in a fundamental
incompleteness of our physical concepts.”2
Einstein opened the paper by pointing out the “profound
formal difference” between current theories of matter, in
which the energy of a body is represented as a sum over a
finite number of degrees of freedom, and Maxwell’s theory, in which the energy is a continuous spatial function
of fields having an infinite number of degrees of freedom.
He suggested that the inability of Maxwell’s theory to give
an adequate account of radiation might be remedied by a
theory in which radiant energy is distributed discontinuously in space. Einstein formulated “the light quantum hypothesis” that “when a light ray spreads out from a point
source, the energy is not distributed continuously over an
ever-increasing volume but consists of a finite number of
energy quanta that are localized at points in space, move
without dividing, and can be absorbed or generated only as
complete units.”
Using Wien’s law, Einstein showed that the expression
for the volume dependence of the entropy of radiation at
a given frequency is similar in form to that of the entropy
of an ideal gas. He concluded that “monochromatic radiation of low density (within the range of validity of Wien’s
radiation formula) behaves thermodynamically as if it consisted of mutually independent energy quanta of magnitude
Rβν/N .”
In addition to its contributions to theory, paper 5 also
provides ingenious explanations of several observed phenomena. It examines three interactions of light with matter,
treated “as if light consisted of such energy quanta”: Stokes’s
173

PART FOUR

rule for fluorescence; the ionization of gases by ultraviolet
light; and the photoelectric effect. Einstein proposed what
later became known as his photoelectric equation,
Emax = R/N βν − P 

(4)

where Emax is the maximum kinetic energy of the photoelectrons, Rβ/N is equivalent to Planck’s h, ν is the frequency
of the incident radiation, and P is the work function of the
metal emitting the electrons. Although his derivation of this
equation was later considered to be a leading achievement
of that paper—it is cited in his 1922 Nobel Prize award—for
almost two decades this argument failed to persuade most
physicists of the validity of the light quantum hypothesis.
Philip Lenard’s experimental studies, to which Einstein referred, only provide qualitative evidence for an increase of
Emax with frequency. For almost a decade the quantitative relationship between electron energy and radiation frequency
was in doubt. By about 1914, there was a substantial body of
evidence tending to support eq. (4). Robert Millikan’s 1916
studies clinched the case for almost all physicists. But even
the confirmation of Einstein’s photoelectric equation did not
bring about widespread acceptance of the concept of light
quanta. Alternative interpretations of the photoelectric effect still received general support for a number of years.
The earliest widely accepted empirical evidence for the
quantum hypothesis came not from radiation phenomena,
but from data on specific heats of solids. In 1907, Einstein
applied the quantum hypothesis to the model of a solid
as a lattice of atoms harmonically bound to their equilibrium positions.3 When the oscillators are treated classically,
the equipartition theorem leads to the DuLong-Petit rule,
174

EARLY WORK ON QUANTUM HYPOTHESIS

predicting a constant specific heat for solids at all temperatures. Treating each atom as a quantized three-dimensional
harmonic oscillator, Einstein was able to explain the wellknown anomalous decrease of the specific heats of certain
solids with decreasing temperature, and to obtain a relation
between the specific heat of a solid and its selective absorption of infrared radiation.
Einstein had long suspected the existence of such a connection. Perhaps inspired by Planck’s work, in 1901 Einstein
wondered whether the internal kinetic energy of solids and
liquids could be conceived of as “the energy of electric resonators.” If it could, then the “specific heat and absorption
spectrum of bodies must then be related.”4 He tried to
connect this model with deviations from the DuLong-Petit
rule.
In 1907 Einstein avoided the implications of the equipartition theorem for the specific heats of solids as he had
avoided them for radiation theory, by introducing energy
quanta. From the average energy of a quantized oscillator, Einstein derived an expression for the specific heat of
a monatomic solid as a function of βT /ν. The expression
approaches zero with the temperature, and approaches the
DuLong-Petit value at high temperatures. Considering the
simplified nature of the model, the expression is in fairly
good agreement with Weber’s data on diamond.
A connection could also be made with absorption results
from Drude’s optical dispersion theory. Drude showed that
the infrared optical eigenfrequencies of a solid are due to
vibrations of the lattice ions, while the electrons are responsible for the ultraviolet eigenfrequencies. At room temperature, the value of Einstein’s expression for specific heat effectively vanishes at a frequency well within the infrared
175

PART FOUR

region for most solids, and increases to the DuLong-Petit
value for even lower frequencies. Einstein concluded that
only the lattice ions and atoms contribute to the specific
heats of solids. Moreover, if a solid displays infrared absorption resonances, the temperature dependence of its specific
heat can be determined from these resonant frequencies.
In 1910 Nernst and his assistant Frederick A. Lindemann
obtained general agreement between Einstein’s predictions
and observations of the variation with temperature of the
specific heat of a number of solids. In 1911 Nernst reported
the first confirmation of the quantum hypothesis outside the
field of radiation, observing: “That the observations in their
totality provide a brilliant confirmation of the quantum theory of Planck and Einstein is obvious.”5
editorial notes
1

Planck, Annalen der Physik 1 (1900): 719–737.
Einstein, “Zur Theorie der Brownschen Bewegung,” Collected Papers, vol. 2, doc. 32, pp. 334–345.
3
“Planck’s Theory of Radiation and the Theory of Specific Heats,”
Annalen der Physik 22 (1907): 180–190, reprinted in Collected Papers,
vol. 2, doc. 38, pp. 379–389.
4
Albert Einstein to Mileva Marić, 23 March 1901, Collected Papers,
vol. 1, doc. 93.
5
“Untersuchungen über die spezifische Wärme bei tiefen Temperaturen. III,” Königlich Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften (Berlin),
Sitzungsberichte (1911), p. 310.
2

176

PA P E R 5
✦

On a Heuristic Point of View
Concerning the Production and
Transformation of Light

A profound formal difference exists between the theoretical concepts that physicists have formed about gases
and other ponderable bodies, and Maxwell’s theory of electromagnetic processes in so-called empty space. While we
consider the state of a body to be completely determined
by the positions and velocities of an indeed very large yet
finite number of atoms and electrons, we make use of continuous spatial functions to determine the electromagnetic
state of a volume of space, so that a finite number of quantities cannot be considered as sufficient for the complete
determination of the electromagnetic state of space. According to Maxwell’s theory, energy is considered to be a
continuous spatial function for all purely electromagnetic
phenomena, hence also for light, whereas according to the
present view of physicists, the energy of a ponderable body
should be represented as a sum over the atoms and electrons. The energy of a ponderable body cannot be broken
177

PAPER 5

up into arbitrarily many, arbitrarily small parts, but according to Maxwell’s theory (or, more generally, according to any
wave theory) the energy of a light ray emitted from a point
source continuously spreads out over an ever-increasing
volume.
The wave theory of light, which operates with continuous spatial functions, has proved itself superbly in describing purely optical phenomena and will probably never be
replaced by another theory. One should keep in mind, however, that optical observations refer to time averages rather
than instantaneous values; and it is quite conceivable, despite the complete confirmation of the theory of diffraction,
reflection, refraction, dispersion, etc., by experiment, that
the theory of light, operating with continuous spatial functions, leads to contradictions when applied to the phenomena of emission and transformation of light.
Indeed, it seems to me that the observations of “blackbody radiation,” photoluminescence, production of cathode
rays by ultraviolet light, and other related phenomena associated with the emission or transformation of light appear
more readily understood if one assumes that the energy of
light is discontinuously distributed in space. According to the
assumption considered here, in the propagation of a light ray
emitted from a point source, the energy is not distributed
continuously over ever-increasing volumes of space, but consists of a finite number of energy quanta localized at points
of space that move without dividing, and can be absorbed
or generated only as complete units.
In this paper I wish to present the train of thought and
cite the facts that led me onto this path, in the hope that
the approach to be presented will prove of use to some researchers in their investigations.
178

PRODUCTION AND TRANSFORMATION OF LIGHT

1. On a Difficulty Concerning
the Theory of
“Black-Body Radiation”
We shall begin by considering the following case from the
perspective of Maxwell’s theory and electron theory. Let a
space enclosed by completely reflecting walls contain a number of freely moving gas molecules and electrons that exert conservative forces on each other when they come very
close, i.e., can collide with each other like molecules according to the kinetic theory of gases.1 Suppose, further, that a
number of electrons are bound to widely separated points
in space by forces directed toward these points and proportional to their distances from them. The bound electrons also
enter into conservative interactions with the free molecules
and electrons when the latter come very close. We call the
bound electrons “resonators”; they emit and absorb electromagnetic waves of definite periods.
According to the present view concerning the origin of
light, the radiation in the volume we are considering, as is
found for the case of dynamic equilibrium based on Maxwell’s theory, must be identical with “black-body radiation”—
at least if one assumes that resonators of all relevant frequencies are present.
For the time being, we will disregard the radiation emitted and absorbed by the resonators and investigate the condition of dynamic equilibrium corresponding to the interac1
This assumption is equivalent to the supposition that the mean kinetic
energies of gas molecules and electrons are equal to each other at thermal
equilibrium. As is well known, Mr. Drude used the latter assumption
to derive a theoretical expression for the ratio of thermal and electrical
conductivities of metals.

179

PAPER 5

tion (collisions between) molecules and electrons. For such
an equilibrium, the kinetic theory of gases asserts that the
mean kinetic energy of a resonator electron must be equal
to the mean translational kinetic energy of a gas molecule. If
we decompose the motion of a resonator electron into three
mutually perpendicular oscillatory motions, we find for the
mean value Ē of the energy of one such linear oscillatory
motion
Ē = R T 
N

where R denotes the universal gas constant, N the number
of “real molecules”1 in one gram-equivalent, and T the
absolute temperature. Because of the equality of the time
averages of the resonator’s kinetic and potential energies, the
energy Ē is two-thirds the kinetic energy of a free monatomic gas molecule. If due to some cause—in our case,
radiation processes—the energy of a resonator were to have
a time average greater or less than Ē, then collisions with
the free electrons and molecules would lead to an energy
loss to or a gain from the gas, different on the average from
zero. Thus, in the case we are considering, dynamic equilibrium is possible only if the average energy of each resonator
is Ē.
We will now apply a similar argument to the interaction
between the resonators and the radiation present in space.
Mr. Planck has derived the condition for dynamic equilibrium in this case2 on the assumption that the radiation can
be treated as the most completely conceivable disordered
2

M. Planck, Ann. d. Phys. 1 (1900): 99.
180

PRODUCTION AND TRANSFORMATION OF LIGHT

process.3 He found:
3
Ēν = L 2 ρν 
8πν

Ēν is here the mean energy of a resonator with eigenfrequency ν (per unit frequency interval), L is the velocity of
light, ν the frequency, and ρν dν the energy per unit volume
of that part of the radiation whose frequency lies between ν
and ν + dν.
3

This assumption can be formulated as follows. We expand the Zcomponent of the electrical force Z at an arbitrary point of the space
being considered during the time interval between t = 0 and t = T
(where T denotes a time period very large relative to all relevant oscillation periods) in a Fourier series,
Z=

ν=∞




Aν sin 2πν t + αν 
T
ν=1

where Aν ≥ 0 and 0 ≤ αν ≤ 2π. If one imagines that at the same point
of space such an expansion is made arbitrarily often at randomly chosen starting times, then one will obtain different sets of values for the
quantities Aν and αν . For the frequency of occurrence of the various
combinations of values of the quantities Aν and αν , there will then exist
(statistical) probabilities dW of the form
dW = f A1 A2    α1 α2    dA1 dA2    dα1 dα2   
The radiation is then most conceivably disordered if
f A1  A2    α1  α2    = F1 A1 F2 A2    f1 α1 · f2 α2    
i.e., when the probability of a specific value of one of the quantities A or
x2 is independent of the values taken by the other quantities A and α respectively. Hence, the more closely fulfilled the condition is that individual
pairs of quantities Aν and αν depend on the emission and absorption processes of particular groups of resonators, the more closely can radiation
in our case be considered to be “most conceivably disordered.”
181

PAPER 5

If, on the whole, the radiation energy of frequency ν does
not continually decrease or increase, the following relations
must hold:
R T = Ē = Ē = L3 ρ 
ν
N
8πν2 ν
2
T 3
ρν = R 8πν
3
N L

These relations, found as the conditions of dynamic equilibrium, not only fail to agree with experiment but also imply
that in our model a definite distribution of energy between
ether and matter is out of the question. Indeed, the wider
the range of the resonator frequencies chosen, the greater
the total radiation energy of the volume, and in the limit we
obtain
∞
0

ρν dν = R 8π3 T
N L

∞
0

ν2 dν = ∞

2. On Planck’s Determination of
the Elementary Quanta4
We now wish to show that Mr. Planck’s determination of the
elementary quanta is to a certain extent independent of his
theory of “black-body radiation.”
Planck’s formula4 for ρν , which is satisfied by all experiments up to now, reads
ρν =

4

αν3
βν
eT −1

M. Planck, Ann. d. Phys. 4 (1901): 561.
182



PRODUCTION AND TRANSFORMATION OF LIGHT

where
α = 610 × 10−56
β = 4866 × 10−11 

For large values of T /ν, i.e., for high wavelengths and radiation densities, this equation takes the following limiting
form:
ρν = α ν2 T 
β

One can see that this formula agrees with that derived in
section 1 from Maxwell’s theory and electron theory. By
equating the coefficients of the two formulas, we obtain
R 8π = α
N L3
β

or
N =

β 8πR
= 617 × 1023 
α L3

i.e., one atom of hydrogen weighs 1/N gram = 162 ×
10−24 g. This is exactly the value found by Mr. Planck,
which in turn is in satisfactory agreement with the values
found by other methods.
We therefore arrive at the following conclusion: the higher
the energy density and wavelength of radiation, the more
reasonable the theoretical foundations we have been using
prove to be; however, they fail completely in the case of low
wavelengths and low radiation densities.
In the following, we shall consider “black-body radiation”
together with the experimental facts, without establishing
any model for the emission and propagation of radiation.
183

PAPER 5

3. On the Entropy of Radiation
The following treatment is contained in a well-known study
by Mr. Wien and is presented here only for the sake of
completeness.
Consider radiation occupying a volume v. We assume that
the observable properties of this radiation are completely
determined when the radiation density ρ ν is given for all
frequencies.5 Since radiations of different frequencies can
be regarded as separable from each other without performing any work or transferring any heat, the entropy of the
radiation can be represented by
∞

S=v

0

ϕ ρ ν dν

where ϕ is a function of the variables ρ and ν. One can
reduce ϕ to a function of a single variable by asserting that
adiabatic compression of radiation between reflecting walls
does not change its entropy. However, we shall not pursue
this, but will immediately investigate how the function ϕ can
be obtained from the black-body radiation law.
In the case of “black-body radiation,” ρ is such a function
of ν that the entropy is a maximum for a given energy, i.e.,
δ

∞
0

ϕ ρ ν dν = 0

if
δ

∞
0

ρ dν = 0

5
This assumption is arbitrary. We shall naturally keep this simplest assumption as long as experiment does not force us to abandon it.

184

PRODUCTION AND TRANSFORMATION OF LIGHT

From this it follows that for every choice of δρ as a function
of ν,
 ∞
0


∂ϕ
− λ δρ dν = 0
∂ρ

where λ is independent of ν. Thus, for black-body radiation,
∂ϕ/∂ρ is independent of ν.
The following equation applies when the temperature of
black-body radiation of volume v = 1 increases by dT :
dS =

 ν=∞
ν=0

∂ϕ
dρ dν
∂ρ

or, since ∂ϕ/∂ρ is independent of ν,
dS =

∂ϕ
dE
∂ρ

Since dE is equal to the heat added and the process is reversible, we also have
dS = 1 dE
T

Comparison yields
∂ϕ
= 1
∂ρ
T

This is the law of black-body radiation. Thus, one can derive
the law of black-body radiation from the function ϕ, and,
inversely, the function ϕ can be determined by integration,
remembering that ϕ vanishes for ρ = 0.
185

PAPER 5

4. Limiting Law for the Entropy of
Monochromatic Radiation at
Low Radiation Density
The existing observations of “black-body radiation” show that
the law
ν
−β t

ρ = αν3 e

originally postulated by Mr. W. Wien for “black-body radiation” is not strictly valid. However, it has been fully confirmed by experiment for large values of ν/T . We shall base
our calculations on this formula, bearing in mind, however,
that our results are valid only within certain limits.
First of all, this formula yields
1 = − 1 ln ρ 
T
βν αν3

and next, using the relation obtained in the preceding
section,
ϕ ρ ν = −


ρ
ρ 
ln 3 − 1 
βν
αν

Suppose now that we have radiation of energy E, with frequency between ν and ν + dν, occupying a volume v. The
entropy of this radiation is


E
S = vϕ ρ ν dν = − E ln
−
1
5
βν
vαν3 dν

If we restrict ourselves to investigating the dependence of
the entropy on the volume occupied by the radiation, and
denote the entropy of radiation by S0 at volume v0 , we obtain
S − S0 = E ln v 
βν
v0
186

PRODUCTION AND TRANSFORMATION OF LIGHT

This equation shows that the entropy of monochromatic
radiation of sufficiently low density varies with the volume
according to the same law as the entropy of an ideal gas or a
dilute solution. In the following, we shall interpret this equation on the basis of the principle introduced into physics by
Mr. Boltzmann, according to which the entropy of a system
is a function of the probability of its state.

5. Molecular-Theoretical Investigation
of the Dependence on Volume of the Entropy
of Gases and Dilute Solutions
In calculating entropy by molecular-theoretical methods, the
word “probability” is often used in a sense differing from
the way the word is defined in probability theory. In particular, “cases of equal probability” are often hypothetically
stipulated when the theoretical models employed are definite enough to permit a deduction rather than a stipulation.
I will show in a separate paper that, in dealing with thermal processes, it suffices completely to use the so-called statistical probability, and hope thereby to eliminate a logical
difficulty that still obstructs the application of Boltzmann’s
principle. Here, however, I shall give only its general formulation and its application to very special cases.
If it is meaningful to talk about the probability of a state
of a system, and if, furthermore, each increase of entropy
can be conceived as a transition to a state of higher probability, then the entropy S1 of a system is a function of the
probability W1 of its instantaneous state. Therefore, if we
have two systems S1 and S2 that do not interact with each
187

PAPER 5

other, we can set:
S1 = ϕ1 W1 
S2 = ϕ2 W2 

If these two systems are viewed as a single system of entropy
S and probability W , then
S = S1 + S2 = ϕ W

and
W = W1 · W2 

The last equation tells us that the states of the two systems
are events that are independent of each other.
From these equations it follows that
ϕ W1 · W2 = ϕ1 W1 + ϕ2 W2 

and, finally,
ϕ1 W1 = C ln W1 + const.
ϕ2 W2 = C ln W2 + const.
ϕ W = C ln W + const.

The quantity C is therefore a universal constant; it follows
from the kinetic theory of gases that its value is R/N , where
the meaning of the constants R and N is the same as above.
If S0 denotes the entropy of a certain initial state and W is
the relative probability of a state of entropy S, we obtain in
general:
S − S0 = R ln W 
N

We now treat the following special case. Let a volume v0
contain a number n of moving points (e.g., molecules) to
188

PRODUCTION AND TRANSFORMATION OF LIGHT

which our discussion will apply. The volume may also contain any arbitrary number of other moving points of any
kind. No assumption is made about the law governing the
motion of the points under discussion in the volume except
that, as concerns this motion, no part of the space (and no
direction within it) is preferred over the others. Further, let
the number of (aforementioned) moving points under discussion be small enough that we can disregard interactions
between them.
This system, which, for example, can be an ideal gas or a
dilute solution, possesses a certain entropy S0 . Let us imagine that all n moving points are assembled in a part of the
volume v0 of size v without any other changes in the system.
It is obvious that this state has a different value of entropy
S , and we now wish to determine the difference in entropy
with the help of Boltzmann’s principle.
We ask: How great is the probability of the last-mentioned
state relative to the original one? Or: How great is the probability that at a randomly chosen instant of time, all n independently moving points in a given volume v0 will be found
(by chance) in the volume v?
Obviously, this probability, which is a “statistical probability,” has the value
W =



v
v0

n



from this, by applying Boltzmann’s principle, one obtains


S − S0 = R n
N

  
ln v 
v0

It is noteworthy that, in the derivation of this equation,
from which the Boyle–Gay-Lussac law and the analogous
189

PAPER 5

law of osmotic pressure can easily be derived thermodynamically,6 no assumptions need be made about the
law governing the motion of the molecules.
6. Interpretation According to Boltzmann’s
Principle of the Expression for the
Dependence of the Entropy of
Monochromatic Radiation on Volume
In section 4 we found the following expression for the
dependence of the entropy of monochromatic radiation on
volume:
 
E
S − S0 =
ln v 
βν
v0

If we write this formula in the form
S − S0 = R ln
N



v
v0

E
NR βν

and compare it with the general formula expressing the
Boltzmann principle,
S − S0 = R ln W 
N

we arrive at the following conclusion: If monochromatic radiation of frequency ν and energy E is enclosed (by reflecting
6

If E is the energy of the system, we get
−d E − T S = pdv = T dS = R n dv 6
N v

thus
pv = R n T 
N
190

PRODUCTION AND TRANSFORMATION OF LIGHT

walls) in the volume v0 , the probability that at a randomly
chosen instant the total radiation energy will be found in the
portion v of the volume v0 is

W =



v
v0

E
 NR βν



From this we further conclude that monochromatic radiation of low density (within the range of validity of Wien’s
radiation formula) behaves thermodynamically as if it consisted of mutually independent energy quanta of magnitude
Rβν/N .7
We also want to compare the mean value of the energy
quanta of black-body radiation with the mean kinetic energy of the center-of-mass motion of a molecule at the same
temperature. The latter is 3 R/N T , while the mean value
2
of the energy quantum obtained on the basis of Wien’s formula is
∞
0

∞
0

− βν
αν3 e T dν
βν

N αν3 e− T dν
Rβν

= 3RT
N

If monochromatic radiation (of sufficiently low density)
behaves, as concerns the dependence of its entropy on volume, as though the radiation were a discontinuous medium
consisting of energy quanta of magnitude Rβν/N , then it
seems reasonable to investigate whether the laws governing
the emission and transformation of light are also constructed
as if light consisted of such energy quanta. We will consider
this question in the following sections.
191

PAPER 5

7. On Stokes’s Rule
Let monochromatic light be transformed by photoluminescence into light of a different frequency, and, in accordance
with the result just obtained, let us assume that both the
incident and emitted light consist of energy quanta of magnitude R/N βν, where ν denotes the relevant frequency. The
transformation process can then be interpreted as follows.
Each incident energy quantum of frequency ν1 is absorbed
and—at least at a sufficiently low distribution density of the
incident energy quanta—generates by itself a light quantum
of frequency ν2 ; it is possible that the absorption of the
incident light quantum may simultaneously give rise to
the emission of light quanta of frequencies ν3  ν4 , etc., as
well as to energy of some other kind (e.g., heat). It makes no
difference by means of what intermediary processes this
end result occurs. If the photoluminescent substance is not
regarded as a permanent energy source, then, according to
the principle of conservation of energy, the energy of an
emitted energy quantum cannot be greater than that of the
light quantum that produced it; hence it follows that
R βν  R βν 
1
N 2
N

or
ν2  ν1 

This is the well-known Stokes’s rule.
It is to be emphasized that, according to our conception,
at low illumination the amount of light emitted must be
proportional to the intensity of the incident light, because
each incident energy quantum will induce an elementary
process of the kind indicated above, independently of other
192

PRODUCTION AND TRANSFORMATION OF LIGHT

incident energy quanta. In particular, there will be no lower
limit for the intensity of the incident light, below which the
light would be unable to excite the fluorescent effect.
According to the conception of the phenomenon presented here, deviations from Stokes’s rule are conceivable
in the following cases:
1. If the number of energy quanta per unit volume simultaneously being transformed is so large that an energy quantum
of emitted light can obtain its energy from several incident
energy quanta.
2. When the incident (or emitted) light does not have the same
energy distribution as black-body radiation within the range
of validity of Wien’s law; if, for example, the incident light
is produced by a body of such high temperature that Wien’s
law is no longer valid for the relevant wavelengths.

The latter possibility deserves special attention. According
to the conception developed above, it is indeed not impossible that even at very low densities a “non-Wien radiation”
will behave differently as concerns its energy from blackbody radiation within the range of validity of Wien’s law.
8. On the Generation of Cathode Rays by
Illumination of Solid Bodies
The usual view that the energy of light is continuously
distributed over the space through which it travels faces
especially great difficulties when one attempts to explain
photoelectric phenomena, which are expounded in a pioneering work by Mr. Lenard.7
7

P. Lenard, Ann. d. Phys. 8 (1902): 169, 170.
193

PAPER 5

According to the view that the incident light consists of
energy quanta of energy R/N βν, the production of cathode rays by light can be conceived in the following way. The
body’s surface layer is penetrated by energy quanta whose
energy is converted at least partially into kinetic energy of
the electrons. The simplest conception is that a light quantum transfers its entire energy to a single electron; we will
assume that this can occur. However, we will not exclude the
possibility that electrons absorb only a part of the energy of
the light quanta.
An electron in the interior of the body having kinetic energy will have lost part of its kinetic energy by the time
it reaches the surface. In addition, we will assume that, in
leaving the body, each electron must perform some work, P
(characteristic for the body). The electrons leaving the body
with the greatest perpendicular velocity will be those located
right on the surface and ejected normally to it. The kinetic
energy of such electrons is
R βν − P 
N

If the body is charged to a positive potential  and surrounded by conductors at zero potential, and if  is just
sufficient to prevent a loss of electrical charge by the body,
it follows that
ǫ = R βν − P 
N

where ǫ denotes the charge of the electron; or
E = Rβν − P ′ 
194

PRODUCTION AND TRANSFORMATION OF LIGHT

where E is the charge of one gram-equivalent of a monovalent ion and P ′ is the potential of this quantity of negative
charge relative to the body.8
If one sets E = 96 × 103 , then  · 10−8 is the potential in
volts that the body acquires when irradiated in vacuum.
To see whether the derived relation agrees in order of
magnitude with experiment, set P ′ = 0, ν = 103 × 1015
(which corresponds to the ultraviolet limit of the solar spectrum) and β = 4866 × 10−11 . We obtain  · 107 = 43 volts,
a result that agrees in order of magnitude with the results
of Mr. Lenard.9
If the formula derived is correct, then , when plotted
in Cartesian coordinates as a function of the frequency of
the incident light, must give a straight line whose slope is
independent of the nature of the substance under study.
As far as I can tell, this conception of the photoelectric effect does contradict its properties as observed by Mr.
Lenard. If each energy quantum of the incident light transmits its energy to electrons, independently of all others, then
the velocity distribution of the electrons, i.e., the nature of
cathode rays produced, will be independent of the intensity
of the incident light; on the other hand, under otherwise
identical circumstances, the number of electrons leaving the
body will be proportional to the intensity of the incident
light.10
8
If one assumes that the individual electron can only be detached by
light from a neutral molecule by the expenditure of some work, one does
not have to change anything in the relation just derived; one need only
consider P ′ as the sum of two terms.
9
P. Lenard, Ann. d. Phys. 8 (1902): 165, 184, table I, fig. 2.
10
P. Lenard, loc. cit., pp. 150, 166–168.

195

PAPER 5

Remarks similar to those regarding possible deviations
from Stokes’s rule apply to the possible limits of validity of
the laws set forth above.
In the foregoing it has been assumed that at least some
of the quanta of the incident light transmit their energies
completely to one electron each. If this likely assumption is
not made, one obtains the following equation in place of the
last one:
E + P ′  Rβν
For cathode luminescence, which is the inverse of the
process discussed above, one obtains by analogous considerations:
E + P ′  R βν
For the substances investigated by Mr. Lenard, P E8 is always considerably greater than Rβν because the potential
difference, which the cathode rays must traverse in order to
produce visible light, amounts in some cases to hundreds,
in others to thousands of volts.11 We must therefore assume
that the kinetic energy of one electron goes into the production of many energy quanta of light.
9. On the Ionization of Gases by
Ultraviolet Light
We have to assume that, in ionization of a gas by ultraviolet light, one energy quantum of light serves to ionize one
gas molecule. From this it follows that the ionization energy
(i.e., the work theoretically required for its ionization) of a
11

P. Lenard, Ann. d. Phys. 12 (1903): 469
196

PRODUCTION AND TRANSFORMATION OF LIGHT

molecule cannot be greater than the energy of an absorbed
light quantum capable of producing this effect. If J denotes
the (theoretical) ionization energy per gram-equivalent, it
follows that
Rβν  J 

According to Lenard’s measurements, the largest effective
wavelength for air is about 19 × 10−5 cm, hence
Rβν = 64 × 1012 erg  J 

An upper limit for the ionization energy can also be obtained from the ionization potentials of rarefied gases. According to J. Stark12 the smallest measured ionization potential (for platinum anodes) for air is about 10 volts.13 Thus,
one obtains 96 × 1012 as the upper limit for J , which is almost equal to the value found above. There is still another
consequence, verification of which by experiment seems to
me of great importance. If each absorbed energy quantum
of light ionizes one molecule, then the following relation
must hold between the quantity of light absorbed L and the
number j of gram-molecules of ionized gas:
j= L 
Rβν

If our conception is correct, this relation must be valid for all
gases that (at the relevant frequency) show no appreciable
absorption unaccompanied by ionization.
(Annalen der Physik 17 [1905]: 132–148)
12

J. Stark, Die Elektrizität in Gasen, p. 57 (Leipzig, 1902).
In the interior of the gases, however, the ionization potential of negative ions is five times greater.
13

197

PAPER 5

editorial notes
1

“Real molecules” are presumably those that are not dissociated.
x should be α.
3
Expressions equivalent to Einstein’s equation were obtained in 1905
by Rayleigh and Jeans without the use of material resonators.
4
Here “elementary quanta” refers to fundamental atomic constants.
In 1901, Planck determined the mass of the hydrogen atom, Loschmidt’s
number (N ), Boltzmann’s constant, and the elementary electric charge.
5
S refers to radiation with frequencies between ν and ν + dν, and
E = ρν dν.
6
The last term should be multiplied by T .
7
Rβ/N corresponds to Planck’s “h.”
8
P E should be E.
2

198

